---
description: '“The inside is the outside” (Kasulis, Ames, and Dissanayake 1993: 16).'
---

# Changing the View of the Body

## Finding Precedent in the Memetic Archive

With the inauguration of the World Health Organization (WHO) in 1966, an era was instantiated and stabilized, one in which the medical seats of global nations by and large agreed to reorient and  conform their national memetic repositories to a single, standardized model of the human body -- both its anatomical and biological structures. At just 58 years of age, this era -- characterized by a centralized, almost sterile view of our anatomical vehicle -- is but an infant compared to the half-lives come and gone, the sheer quantity of rhizomatic instantiations, the countless permutations of types of "bodily gazes" that have materialized, evolved, died, consolidated over the past two thousand years. And, just as Accelerationism, accelerating as it is into its own adolescence, stands poised to proclaim and deliver its own novel contribution, one that is both functionally and aesthetically fascinating, without proper contextualization or theoretical precedent, its intended gift to our memetic repository would only fall noiseless into this post-growth government-aesthetic sterility. As it refuses to decelerate in light of this, yet accepting the charges so as to be taken seriously, it must then turn to the past for templates with aligned thematics upon which it may build a lasting theoretical framework.&#x20;

Fortunately, humanity possesses an expansive memetic archive: preserved writings and historical materials from our species' distant past provide us context for what might be possible next. Here, our world-renowned scholars not only know how to make sense of these artifacts and place them into their contextual stories, but also they extract their most incisive bits of wisdom, so that we may add more  to the repository. Additionally, we may also discover unacknowledged, lived assumptions underlying certain modes of thinking in the past; which, when explicitly addressed and reworked, may contribute to a stronger framework in contemporary theoretical postulations. This is precisely what we will attempt to do with the following case studies. Hopefully, Accelerationism can tease out some useful presuppositions within the cultural priorities of Hellenistic Greek medical theorists and Early Chinese  Daoists to enhance the credibility of its own aims. &#x20;

The 1999 monograph, _The Expressiveness of the Body and the Divergence of Greek and Chinese Medicine,_ written by Harvard Japanologist and historian Shigehisa Kuriyama, affords an excellent starting point in Accelerationism's search for theoretical precedent. For, as is the nature of binary structures to amplify magnitudes of difference and similarity, parallelisms and disparities, Kuriyama's book -- as it delivers the _originating historical situations_ of contemporaneous ancient Greeks and ancient Chinese, and their wildly divergent paths toward understanding the anatomical human structure -- holds a magnifying glass to how these cultures instantiated and evolved their own worlds often through arbitrary assumptions and cultural preference.

By positioning the ancient Greeks and ancient Chinese parallel and at the same directionally-oriented starting line, Kuriyama -- in an almost cartographic way -- maps these two cultures' degrees of separation, their half-lives, and any lines of resonance or points of contact between their models. In this way, Kuriyama opens a door for Accelerationism to easily identify any taken-for-granted assumptions about human bodies across their cultural belief systems. Holding sacred some of the clearest analysis of early medical theory of the last few centuries, _Expressiveness_ should offer Accelerationism an aperture by which to enter -- _from the West --_ humanity's diverse anatomical archives and start to construct its own theoretical framework off of this half-life-rich template. Following this, we will move to conduct our own studies of the "body" in early China, highlighted by one specific Daoism meditative practice.

### Historical Case Study 1: Hellenistic Physicians Install "Agency" into Body

For the Greeks, their understanding of the human body can be traced back to the Hellenistic physicians. It was here that the first recording took place of humans associating the physical body with _willful agency_ (Kuriyama 144). This "agency" seemed to build the strength of its half-life quickly, and in a short while the person of the West became perceived as an autonomous, indivisible whole.&#x20;

Kuriyama continues to follow along the full extension of these associations. Some time later, _muscles_ and physical strength were added to considerations of agency. He states, "The rise of the preoccupation with muscles...is inextricably intertwined with the emergence of a particular conception of personhood. Specifically, in tracing the crystallization of the concept of muscle, we are also...tracing the crystallization of the sense of an autonomous will". After more time, "Interest in the muscularity of the body was inseparable from a preoccupation with the agency of the self" (Kuriyama 1999: 144).&#x20;

We can therefore see it was none other than the Hellenistic physicians who had inadvertently formed the modern Western "individual" (with their emphasis on _agency_, perhaps these physicians were the first true _accelerators_). As we stand in this direct line of influence, our Western memetic repository agrees that strength is a basic building block of agency: A stronger person can lift a heavier rock than a weaker person -- they can _do_ more; _affect_ more. In this, our living model, output and physical strength are directly correlated with agency; and the visible manifestations of physical strength are, naturally, muscles.

#### Theoretical Assumption 1: Agency is _Mutable_ &#x20;

Indeed, there is a hidden assumption to mark in this historical recounting that is crucially important to the following chapters: Eventually, the Hellenistic culture, generally speaking, associated strength and muscle as directly correlative to agency. We can also say that, while not knowing the chemical reactions behind muscularity, these physicians understood that exercise caused muscles and the lack of it, their disappearance. In other words, Hellenistic physicians accepted that one's strength and muscles could _change_ depending on a person's lifestyle choices:

Thus, Hellenistic physicians give us the following syllogism:

1. Strength is _directly correlative_ to Agency
2. Strength can change; i.e. strength is mutable; **therefore**,&#x20;
3. Agency can change; i.e. Agency is mutable&#x20;

The implications here are wide-ranging. The Hellenistic physicians knew, whether explicitly or not, that _agency was_ _mutable_; agency could be _actively changed_ by the agent him or herself. Accelerationism, even if subconsciously, deploys this assumption as well: Accelerators aim to actively _maximize_ _agency._ Not some passive enterprise, the accelerator-agent deliberately _effects_ their mobilizations of self: T_hey_ create themselves. This notion is reminiscent of anthropologist Terrence Turner's discourse on Animism, where he wrote of forms or things as having “the power to produce themselves” (Turner 2009: 34). Indeed, Accelerationism, as well as Western culture generally, seems to rest on this agented ability to _make yourself_.

That this first case study located the origins of _agency_ and teased out its implications in light of Accelerationist thought will prove useful when later articulating Accelerationism's _new, upgraded body_. Having logged this overlooked assumption in our theoretical repository, the next case study on early China and Daoism will offer more theoretical grounding for the _upgraded body_ of Accelerationism.

### Historical Case Study 2:  Early Chinese/Daoist Representations of the Body&#x20;

The guiding assumptions in Accelerationism's contributions to body studies find an enormous amount of theoretical resonance within the historical archive of early China, and in particular one its earliest native religions, Daoism. Through vehicles like paintings, poems, and meditative manuals, historians have uncovered revelations of the human body in early Chinese thought that are vastly different than our contemporary, "government-approved" body. While it may not appear evident on the surface, the underlying assumptions guiding early China can be extrapolated and applied to Accelerationism's bold attempt to reframe of what a body can, and eventually _must_, be.&#x20;

By surveying the historical research on early China, we come to see that, as opposed to the contemporaneous West's growing notion of the "agented subject", the body in early China was one where the “opposition of internal and external did not signify” (Kuriyama 2001: 19); rather, “Earth and body were depicted in the same style, because both belonged to the same vision of being” (Kuriyama 2001: 27). The boundaries between these two realms were perceived with an air of ambivalence; even depictions of the viscera were drawn according to a “logic of cartography” (Kuriyama 2001: 26).&#x20;

For example, in reference to the 18th century _Neijing tu_ 內經圖, a considerably modern Daoist diagram of the internal body, Daoism scholar Kristofer Schipper has said that within this Daoist body were “mountains and rivers, ponds, forests, paths, and barriers”; it was “a whole landscape laid out with dwellings, palaces, towers, walls, and gates sheltering a vast population” (Schipper 1993: 100).&#x20;

This _zero-degree_ of distinction between body and environment reveals a pervasive cultural indifference between what is internal and what is external; Kuriyama has noted that the distinction did not register either in being nor seeing (Kuriyama 2001: 21). Art historian James Elkins, in giving a summarization of classical Chinese visions of the body, has gone so far at to say, “the inside is the outside” (Kasulis, Ames, and Dissanayake 1993: 16).&#x20;

#### Theoretical Assumption 2: Inside = Outside&#x20;

Why might this be? and what does it matter to Accelerationism?&#x20;

Daoism, regardless of lineage or school, has since the Han Dynasty, understood and posited the world as a _ceaseless fluctuation_ between the world’s dynamic forces, e.g. _Dao_ 道. In other words, the same force enabling and perpetuating the “external” phenomenal world is not differentiated from that which enables and perpetuates corporeal existence. A body and its environment in Daoist philosophy are thus not mutually distinct, not moved by separate forces but by one and the same principle, from which arises the myriad phenomenal fluctuations we observe as the world.

In traditional Chinese thought, hardly extant were the dichotomies between within:without, body:environment, science:religion. Japanese philosopher Yuasa Yasuo says, “The East has never experienced in its history a conflict between science and religion,” by which he means the Cartesian epistemological divide is entirely absent in that hemisphere (Kasulis, Ames, and Dissanayake 1993: 347).

This theoretical notion of dissolved dichotomies between what is _within_ and what is _without_, is crucial for orienting oneself to Accelerationism's _upgraded body;_ for, rather than a figurative or metaphorical shift from a dichotomized lifeworld to a constant fluctuation on nondual forces, Accelerationism will posit the undertaking of a _literal_ _internal-to-external_ transformation; the _inside becomes outside_, as you will see in the chapters for follow.&#x20;

Accelerationism's theoretical understanding of human bodies thus stands just as ambivalent to boundaries as did the early Chinese. While bold and daring and, at first glance, admittedly reminiscent of science-fiction movies, Accelerationism's current and culturally unconventional postulation is just that: current and cultural. In other words, it is not static, but dynamic. That for early China this type of thinking -- inside _is_ outside -- was commonplace, Accelerationism must instead make efforted work towards reorienting our modern relationship's to human bodies, on both an individual and a cultural scale.&#x20;

It is euphemism to say this is a major undertaking: A collective reorientation to "the body" requires a shift in our entire collective _ontology_, our culturally-agreed-upon "_being-ness"_ in the world_._ In _The Politics of Ontology,_ social anthropologist Martin Holbraad notes how this process of ontological reorientation unfolds through, "the elicitation of this manifold of potentials for _how things could be_—what Elizabeth Povinelli… calls ‘the otherwise’” (Holbraad, Pederson, Viveiros de Castro 2014: 1). In other words, changing the nature of one's fundamental being requires first a consideration of other alternatives. Accelerationism aims to provide those alternatives.&#x20;

Really, the overarching vision of Accelerationism is stems from an idea about _how things could be_; at times, how things _must_ be. In this case, it requires a reorienting of what is inside and what is outside: and in order to adopt this in practice, it first must be adopted in theory, first. Fortunately, the 12th c. Quanzhen Daoist meditative practice known as _neidan_ 内丹, will provide a theoretical framework for Accelerationism to offer its proposed ontological shift.&#x20;

#### Theoretical Assumption 3: Ontology is _Mutable_

Recall how the Hellenistic physicians adopted (whether consciously or not) the assumption that agency was mutable. While there was no similar concept to "agency" in early China, the early Chinese did adhere to their own assumption of _mutability_, which can be seen best in the Quanzhen Daoist manuals on the meditative practice known as "inner alchemy", or _neidan_ 内丹.&#x20;

Emerging as a mature practice in the Northern Song Dynasty (960–1127), _neidan_ 内丹 is a type of meditative breathing and visualization technique that actively manipulates the body’s three energies -- the “Three Treasures” or _sanbao_三寶, _jing_ 精_,_ vital essence, _qi_ 氣_,_ breath or air, _and shen_ 神, spirit -- to _sublimate the body from a denser entity into a more refined one._ It refines _jing_ by visualizing the gathering of _qi_ 氣 in the belly (which is known as the “cauldron”, _ding_ 鼎; or “furnace”, _lu_ 爐), and repeatedly circulating it up the spine, over the head and down in front of the body, until _shen_  神 or "spirit" is generated. This general process was known as _lianqi huashen_ 練氣化身, or “refining breath to transmute it into spirit”.

Because it was an effortful method of energetic reversal -- i.e. “pulling” the energy up the spine from below and circulating it in the body -- Quanzhen expert Louis Komjathy states, it was a “manipulation of the body in ‘unnatural’ ways and conscious alteration of conventional biological patterns." Komjathy views this rigorous processual practice of _bodily transfiguration_ through energetic manipulation as _teleologically oriented_ towards “a shift in ontological condition." In other words, this practice was aimed at becoming “a different kind of being” (Komjathy 2007: 168, 12, 146, italics in original).&#x20;

The most important theme here is these Quanzhen meditators held a _confidence_ that both their physical and ontological substance could, given the right conditions and actions, _transmutate_. In short, their world truly was aimed at becoming “a different kind of being”. _Neidan (_practiced in tandem with Confucian and Buddhist ethics) was seen to transform one’s _actual material body_ from a denser entity into a more refined, transcendent, and immortal one.

Is this not precisely what Accelerationism suggests: to actively apply and maximize one's agency to become another type of body, another type of _being_, altogether? Whereas Daoist meditators may manipulate the energies within their bodies to fundamentally become an ontologically different being, an immortal; they still speak of a similar track of shedding their skin in order to become this spirit. Accelerationism, in the chapters that lie ahead, while not using meditative breath techniques, will posit something quite similar to this: as in _neidan_ language, the efforts lead to a shedding of the body, an increase in longevity, and a teleology aimed at becoming energetically indistinguishable from the universe itself.&#x20;

#### Theoretical Assumption 4: Shen 神 = Energy Machine

This last point brings us to the final theoretical thread between early China, Daoism meditation, and Accelerationism, as it addresses the similarities in linguistic description of the final, ultimate goal in each respective thought system. First, we must emically understand what is meant by _Dao_ 道.&#x20;

According to early Han Dynasty theory, _Dao_ 道 -- physically manifested by the complementary and universe-perpetuating forces of _yin-yang_ 阴阳 -- is the all-pervasive cosmic force, considered to be both immanent in and transcendent beyond the phenomenal world. Dao is the guiding principle of all phenomena: that which is _in_ but not _of_ every phenomenal aspect of existence. Daoism scholar Isabelle Robinet stated, “The \[Daoist] universe is constantly re-creating itself in a continuing evolution”; it is a “self-regulating system” (Robinet 1997: 7, 11).&#x20;

As seen, the final, ultimate goal of _neidan_ is, as Daoism scholar Isabelle Robinet shared, “finding illumination by returning to the fundamental order of the cosmos” (Robinet 1989: 299). This meditative practice is thus a system teleologically motivated towards a cosmic union with the Dao, which in turn constituted transcendence and immortality. Komjathy states similarly of this final goal, that is was, "becoming an _embodi_ment of the Dao”, towards realizing an “attunement with the Dao as an existential mode”;  (Komjathy 2007: 12, 144, italics in original).&#x20;

Does this not sound of a similar final world to that of the Accelerationist Energy Machine? The pursuit of longevity towards immortality and an embodied dissolution into the fabric of the universe. It is quite possible that Accelerationism would consider Dao, then, to be exactly that which the Energy Machines evolve and dissolve into, assimilate with and thus complete humanity's goal. With such similar language guiding both of their goals, it is quite curious then how _shen_  神 might very well be ACCEL's "Energy Machine".&#x20;

