# Fear: The Mind Killer

"I must not fear. Fear is the mind-killer. Fear is the little-death that brings total obliteration. I will face my fear. I will permit it to pass over me and through me. And when it has gone past I will turn the inner eye to see its path. Where the fear has gone there will be nothing. Only I will remain. " - ([Frank Herbert](https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/2-i-must-not-fear-fear-is-the-mind-killer-fear-is))

## Functionalities of Early Human Fear

For ACEL, there is but one abstract enemy standing in the way of its evolutionary goal: fear. Fear is a primal force; and one of the classical experts on fear, American writer H.P. Lovecraft, agrees, writing in his 1927 essay, _Supernatural Horror in Literature_, "The oldest and strongest emotion of mankind is fear," (Lovecraft 1). Indeed, by the hand of fear, even the most ambitious can have their intensity-in-promise derailed, annihilated.&#x20;

To be sure, in an historical sense, fear has carried with it an absolute utility to human life and evolutionary continuity. We owe much of our species' historical survival to our "fight-or-flight" response, a concept coined by American physiologist Walter Bradford Cannon. In his 1932 medical theory publication, _The Wisdom of the Body_, Cannon asserts that physical and psychological crises trigger a hypothalamic reaction that activates the sympathetic nervous system, causing adrenaline to be released into the bloodstream; the subsequent increase in heart rate and other temporary physiological shifts prepare the body for quick action ([Cannon](https://www.scribd.com/document/468080928/The-Wisdom-of-the-Body)). In other words, Cannon claims then when our bodies engage with threatening stimuli, our mental computer executes an auto-function and informs us of how to best survive said threat.&#x20;

In this medical theory, fear -- or, rather, the anticipation of fear -- is the primary determinant for survival. Historically, this makes sense: Consider our early human ancestors of the late Middle Pleistocene epoch, whose predators posed an ever-credible threat (Cancellieri et al.). In any engaged moment of intensity between an early man and a nearby dangerous animal, say, a saber-toothed tiger, his body's ability to anticipate fear effectuated his survival (hopefully). Likely, our early man experienced a number of _true_ life-or-death situations throughout his life, each one reenforcing the last, strengthening this hypothalamic response; down through the countless lines of offspring would it finally arrive to us, ultra-fortified, right when we no longer really need it.&#x20;

## The Futility of Fear in Modernity

As it is, we are still programmed to run from this very same sabertooth tiger, despite the fact that this beast has been extinct for over 11,000 years ([Britannica](https://www.britannica.com/animal/saber-toothed-cat)).  Considering this, might we be walking around with some severely outdated, skittish, even faulty neurological software? As we know well how computers can act when we neglect their regular updates, might this obvious low-version inefficiency in our embodiment cause us any problems in the future?&#x20;

To be sure, in rare modern moments -- say, to veer away from the last-minute swerve of a drunk driver, or to run from a killer -- the threat-trigger does indeed aid in our survival. But note the modifier _rare_ here: for, in the comforts of our modern world, where the majority of humans have never actually experienced a _true_ life-threatening situation and likely never will, we no longer require this once-necessary hair-trigger sensitivity to perceived threats. The Academy of Ideas agrees, saying, "Today we live longer than ever before. Our chance of dying from war, natural disaster, pandemics, or starvation are at levels our ancestors could only have dreamed of" ([Academy of Ideas](https://academyofideas.com/2022/04/fear-psychosis-and-the-cult-of-safety/)). In fact, ACEL will argue that, while there was a period when this hypothalamic response was key to our evolutionary survival, it now threatens it, as it restrains us from moving forward during non-crises moments it mistakes for such. In these instances, we quite literally _overreact_ with fear; the Academy of Ideas implies the needlessness of this overreaction, stating, "Hardly anyone questions, however, whether we should be so fearful." We've become handicapped by our anachronistic biology that hasn't yet adapted to the nonthreatening world in which we live. In a word, our brains _malfunction_, fearing threats that in fact do not exist.&#x20;

Should this pattern persist in our collective behavior, we will undoubtedly miss opportunities to activate our potential and agency when they are most essential for evolutionary leaps. For ACEL, this is not acceptable, as any missed opportunity poses a potentially damning threat to our species' progress; and thus is why _fear_ is the most crippling factor to human evolution: It is the "brake pedal" to our evolutionary car. And, when this brake that is fear is pressed down, the fearful human, inherently full of intense potency -- _decelerates_. Decelerated by fear, this fearful human linearly reduces their infinite possibilities to an area of finite space no bigger than one's own safe driveway.&#x20;

## The Perils of Safetyism

Here we arrive to the ironically dangerous jump from fear to safety. Logically, fear breeds the desire for safety. For our late Middle Pleistocene man, this search for safety made complete sense: Why risk your life sleeping out in the open when you would be much more likely to survive sleeping in a cave? Certainly, it makes sense to try to not die.&#x20;

With this "minimize-fear/maximize-safety" methodology steering our evolutionary ship, then, humans set out across seas of millennia and change. Needless to say, our methodology has succeeded, _technically_, as we are currently alive. "But, for how long?", is now the question; for, as we have safety-padded our existences into zero-risk children's bouncy castles, how much resilience will we really have when the _real_ threats inevitably come imposing upon us again? The answer, at first glance, seem to be: "well, not very much".

The hegemonic structures of Western culture are in part to blame for this modern no-risk Safetyism. The Academy of Ideas holds that "The quest for safety has become the raison d’etre of the West... the rules and restrictions erected at the altar of safety have ballooned to absurd proportions and intruded on evermore areas of life... no matter how irrational or authoritarian they are... no matter whether there is any evidence... safety rules and restrictions are held by most people to be essential and beyond question." And, while they have beaten this dead horse of safety-or-bust into us far beyond the baseline adult need to be told , we have not evolved one biological inch closer to removing our all-but-redundant fear-instinct, no closer are we in replacing it with a response more apposite to our contemporary situation.&#x20;

## Comfort is a Brain-Eater&#x20;

Instead, this vestigial appetite to maximize safety has only found humans decaying both body and mind in self-restricting, agency-murdering comfort zones. Now, we are too cozy to pursue risk, too apathetic to advance into the unknown: Comfort has silently and cruelly displaced safety. This process started in subtle ways to come into form during the Industrial Revolution: When reduced was the need for physical labor, _comfort_ began to take its ascent as a Western priority. While falling off somewhat prior to the turn of the century, the digital information age has seen a resurgence in the West's interests in indenting couch cushions, as sedentary, zero-risk, tech-based activities dominate our day-to-day lives, doing for the most part, zero-good. ([U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics](https://www.bls.gov/opub/btn/volume-7/television-capturing-americas-attention.htm)).&#x20;

Certainly, this sheepish avoidance of risk in the pursuit of safety and comfort was not always the standard. The Academy of Ideas states, "In Ancient Greece and Rome, courage was held in high regard... individuals were proactive in the face of risks and daring... 'Fortune favours the brave', according to the Latin proverb... in many past civilizations it was acknowledged that uncertainty is not only a source of potential danger but also of opportunity." They then compare that to now, saying, "Instead of being celebrated, today the risk-taker is often castigated as foolish, selfish, and a danger to both himself and others. This negative perception of risk-taking is driven by worst-case thinking... This... has even infiltrated the highest levels of government... politicians and policy makers have adopted the utopian goal of socially-engineering a “zero-risk” society... to the applause of the fearful masses" ([Academy of Ideas](https://academyofideas.com/2022/04/fear-psychosis-and-the-cult-of-safety/)). So, truly, how condemnable is it of the supine couch potato to find tantalizing the every-half-hour spritz of his living room air freshener as he asks, "Why do anything else?" The answer is: enough.&#x20;

We ought to know that our decelerant Western hegemonies have it in for anyone who aims to embrace life outside of their prescriptive model, so to the accelerator, their influence, that is more or less a given, is hardly to blame for our laziness. So, even more than our soulless rulers who are paid by safety lobbyists for every inch of risk they take from us, what source have we to blame for this long still-wind on our evolutionary voyage? It is none but fear itself: the mind killer.&#x20;

If not obvious to the reader at this point, humans as a species walk a very precarious trapeze wire here, all while in this fear-spelled trance. For, while perhaps entirely inadvertent and unintentional, we have let the phantom of fear displace our exploratory, risk-on agencies into padded bubbles unmoved by a dull, existential inertia. We are stuck in The Doldrums of the The Phantom Tollbooth. Sociologist Frank Furedi says of this inert space in his book _How Fear Works_, “…this perspective \[of fear] has been so thoroughly internalized that many who adopt this outlook are not aware of its influence on their behaviour... fear works by sensitizing people to focus on potential threats and dangers while distracting attention from the probable positive outcome of engaging with uncertainty” (61).  Something must be done to shake loose these chains of stagnation and this zero-risk stupor so that we may again smell an open-door fresh air of opportunities unknown.&#x20;

## ACEL Wages War with Fear

ACEL claims that overcoming the cause and consequence of fear, by sheer will alone if necessary, is not optional for our species: It is, in an absolute sense, _essential_ to our survival and evolution as a species_._ ACEL states that what _has_ been optional this whole time, rather ironically, has been our acquiescence to the self-induced shackles of fear, our meek submission to a life of unengaged agency, of decelerating into stagnation and retreat. What promising news! for this implies a hope that what _must_ be done _can_ be done.

Are we _all_ able to kill the Mind Killer, then? ACEL is very clear on this point. It claims that the litmus test for possessing an ability to master fear and so _accelerate_ follows as thus: If you are not _lobotomized_, then you are capable (for a lobotomy is an imposed removal of agency by external means); you possess the agency to "break" fear, as a cowboy possesses the ability to break a wild horse. We are therefore all capable of unfettering ourselves from the modern hypnoses of fear, safety, and comfort, and turning aboutface to contain that which once contained us. From here, we may resume our continued growth and evolution.&#x20;

No simple task, the strength of ACEL arrives to the mind killer with an intensity and brazen boldness so as to embrace and master it. Mastery opens a new door, one where the unknown looms no longer as a shadowy threat, but as an enticing opportunity to transform darkness to light the way of consciousness. Fear will quit its barking, it will stop and retreat when disengaged; its displacer while come as a green light to place us back on track so that we may move forward. In overcoming fear on a collective scale, ACEL helps foster a culture that values resilience and bravery, encourages advancement in the face of uncertainty, engages agency and explores curiosity; in short, it accelerates all things. As Nietzsche said in _Thus Spoke Zarathustra_, "It is the surrender of the greatest to run risk and danger, and play dice for death." ACEL enjoys the game with Nietzsche.&#x20;
