# Religion as a Tool of Control

## Differing Perspectives on the Misuse of Religion

This quest to overcome fear will be no cake walk, however, for hegemonic structures — those powers that be — deploy at every opportunity memetic weapons intended to shackle us to existences that are defined by a meek, subordinated fear. The catalog of memes historically exploited are, in truly evil fashion, those that of themselves are anything but base; rather, they are most often the nurturing, functionally positive memes (e.g. religion, medicine, education, work) that would otherwise empower a human's agency and bring calculable benefit to an individual's lived life, as well as the collective. Regrettably, it is these that are most vulnerable to exploitation; and, among this suite of effective memetic deceits, it is Religion — the Biblical traditions`*`, in particular — that has proven itself over millennia to be the preferred tool of control.&#x20;

Marx called it the "opium of the people"; Freud, an "illusion"; Arendt, "hostile";  Lenin, "the most shameful infection"; Weber, paraphrased, "blinding" (Strong 142). Clearly, eminent thinkers in Western history have not given this meme a mere passing glance, and certainly no favorable review; rather, there is among them evident agreement that Religion, by its very nature, carries some sort of draconian utility — here they might cite The Crusades or the Spanish Inquisition as testaments to their shared conclusion.

ACEL disagrees: For this movement, Religion is like the shepherd of a flock. Ideally, he is a benevolent guide leading the lambs and their parents in unity toward a purpose, one rooted in accelerant virtue. Only when misused does the shepherd that is Religion wax tyrant, trading staff for whip to mete out fear in his requisition of the flock's subordinate compliance. Thus, for ACEL, the shepherd does not _begin_ a tyrant, is not _inherently so_, he merely has the capacity to misuse his role for decelerant, life-draining aims, to spread fear, that ultimate parasite on mental bandwidth.&#x20;

## Challenging the Greats

If the historical minds above indeed take the root of religion to be poisoned (which they do), and ACEL takes a more optimistic route, who is, in fact, correct? Are our philosophizing predecessors throwing the baby out with the bathwater, or is ACEL idealistically naive in its youth? These questions bear asking, for to take such a nuanced yet drastically opposing stance to this heavy-hitting lineup, ACEL must earn its mettle and prove its stance with sound logos. If it wishes to be taken seriously as a thought system, it must accelerate into challenges such as this.&#x20;

For, while history cannot hide the many heinous acts that have been committed in the name of God, surely, that ACEL champions Religion as an inherently positive memetic force, it must address nuances with which these thinkers were perhaps unwilling to deal. Should it be up to this task of postulating with sound framework that there _must_ exist positive substance in the memetic dispensation of Religion, as opposed to solely an agency-annihilating vapor, then it will truly begin its own Sisyphean climb towards philosophy proper.&#x20;

It will of course be an all-too brief exercise, but try we must in reasoning through potentially overly reductionist takes on Religion, even if they are takes made by some of modern history's most profound theorizers. Truly, though, what is ACEL, if not bold?

As we move forward into this theoretical deep end of the swimming pool, a few guiding questions will be useful: What exactly is the shared causative of these thinkers' positions on religion; do they in fact share a locus in their collective judgement on Religion-proper? For, of all the socially-deployed memetic structures they might potentially disdain just as profoundly, what is it _specifically_ about Religion that riles up so many of modern history's most memorable thinkers — that had Nietzsche conclude that Christianity in its very origins possessed "'... an already irresistible corruption within the first community'" (Strong 148)? Further, when he reflects on Jesus' love in _Beyond Good and Evil_ that "'... even the best and profoundest love' is 'more likely to destroy than to save'" (Strong 150), are we to understand Nietzsche's view of "love" as _inherently_ _destructive_? Again, while ACEL immediately accepts that Religion can be misused as a tool of oppression, it will respond in the negative here, as it will claim, and hopefully conclude through a process of deduction, that it is not _inherently_ corruptive.&#x20;

Should it find success in this theoretical exercise, ACEL will be better equipped to navigate the future of its own memetic dispensations.&#x20;

## Finding the Vulnerability Gap: An All-Too-Brief Sociological Treatment of Religion

We need not reinvent the wheel here in our examining the _tone_ _of inherence_ in  Religion-proper — whether it is innately built for monopolistic oppression or whether it is at baseline a true memetic gem of human invention that finds itself often in the wrong hands, it would behoove us to employ the framework of Peter Berger's sociological treatment of Religion in his 1967 work, _The Sacred Canopy: Elements of a Sociological Theory of Religion._&#x20;

### Berger & Dennett: How Memes Persist&#x20;

Recall from Chapter 1 that Berger frames the half-life of all social constructions — i.e. memes — within his theoretical notion of _legitimation_. This is more or less a time-based process of _reminding_ members of their memetic foundations; he states, "If the nomos \[i.e. the body of governing customs] of a society is to be transmitted from one generation to another, so that the new generation will also come to 'inhabit' the same social world, there will have to be legitimating formulas to answer the questions that, inevitably, will arise in the minds of the new generation'" (Berger 40-41). He nods to the fact that the process of legitimation is synonymous with the meme's ability to defend its social existence, which he frames as being "... grounded in problems of socialization and social control;" for, "Any exercise of social control... demands legitimation over and above the self-legitimating facticity of the institutional arrangements — precisely because this facticity is put in question by the resisters who are to be controlled" (Berger 40, 41). While Berger's framing sounds aggressive here as it harps on this notion of "control", he is in fact saying nothing more extreme than Dennett's positing of "... the possibility that cultural entities may evolve according to selectional regimes that make sense only when the answer to the _Cui bono_ question is that it is the cultural items themselves that benefit from the adaptations they exhibit" (Dennett 4). To state this more simply, both thinkers are relating the same method by which a meme fundamentally extends its existence through time. We can therefore take Dennett's "cultural items" _as_ Berger's "exercise\[s] in social control" — both are simply being cleverly referential to memetic structures (e.g. memes); but the most compelling piece of this cognitive harmony of how these two see memes persisting through time, is that they _both attribute the agency-to-control_ _to_ _the_ _cultural items — to the memes —_ _themselves_.&#x20;

Already, we are hardly only talking about Religion anymore. Granted, should we take Dennett's wit as law in his section title, _Memes as Cultural Viruses_ (Dennett 4), which immediately follows the above quotation, then we can simply close this book and conclude that ACEL and the pessimist theorizers are _both_ wrong: If every memetic structure is oppressive and parasitic in its agency, then ACEL was far too optimistic and our Marx and our Weber weren't pessimistic enough. Common sense may stop in here for a moment: Dennett's analogy to memes as viruses, and indeed Berger's insistence upon "control" is primarily indebted towards the _movement_ factor and the _contagion_ factor of viruses, _not_ its qualifiable life-debilitating, agency-draining nature. If this were in fact the case, then the meme of waving your hand in saying hello to a friend across the street would leave us utterly incapacitated, as if a parasite were attacking us simply by the action. For these reasons, Berger's notion of _legitimation_ can therefore be understood as a _neutral-in-tone_ socially-organizing set of influential reminders; religion being but one of many organizational constructions.&#x20;

### Religion: In a Memetic Class of its Own

While repetition is standard practice for all _other_ social legitimations, Berger does indeed place Religion in a class of its own here. He states, on account of its inherent power as being a memetic mirror of an absolute reality, Religion need _only_ to account for one precarious attribute: that it rests on a "_created-ness"_; that is, Religion's only lasting requirement to survive _ad infinitum_, its only necessary legitimation through time, is in the hiding of the fact that it is _manmade_.&#x20;

For this reason, Berger runs through the "recipe" by which Religion has so successfully extended its half-life since inception. He says, "Let the institutional order be so interpreted as to hide, as much as possible, its constructed character. Let that which has been stamped out of the ground _ex nihilo_ appear as the manifestation of something that has been existent from the beginning of time... Let the people forget that this order was established by men and continues to be dependent upon the consent of men. Let them believe that, in acting out the institutional programs that have been imposed upon them, they are but realizing the deepest aspirations of their own being and putting themselves in harmony with the fundamental order of the universe" (43-44).&#x20;

Of course, this is an etic understanding of Religion that would understandably be taken by a sociologist. For Berger, Religion "... is the human enterprise by which a sacred cosmos is established... this reality addresses itself to \[a believer who] locates his life in an ultimately meaningful order" (35-36). The human, and society generally, move through a "dialectic process \[of] externalization, objectivation, and internalization" (10). Berger notes the how the process begins, "In the course of externalization men pour out meaning into reality;" hereupon a world is instantiated, or "objectivated" through man's meaning (37). It is here that religion legitimates and organizes around this believer a sacred cosmos, and it does this "... so effectively because it relates the precarious reality constructions of empirical societies with ultimate reality," (43).&#x20;

### Philosophizers: Stop Here

This once-removed scientific post of religious observation might very well be where our opposition finally rested their case of "Religion as poison"; for, by maintaining a safe and (ironically fearful) distance from Religion, they were sure to never catch Dennett's _virus_. That is to say, in remaining _only_ scientific when assigning value to that which is inherently not, is not only to mistake the forest for the trees, but it is also to utterly void any positive memetic sentiment that Religion might offer to an individual, or a family. So while it is certainly no wonder how a _philosophizer_ could miss out on the emotive benefits of Religion in an emic sense, here our exploration can borrow what has been well understood in the field of anthropology for decades: that one cannot comprehensively understand a culture until one dives in, or better, _accelerates_ in, eating at the table of culture, so as to perform a proper case study. Thus, ACEL will accelerate further than the philosophers.

### ACEL, Like Religion, Persists

Acknowledging the merits of emic observation, ACEL reads Berger's "closer" notions of Religion: In what might be said to be an asymptotically pure and unadulterated emic conception of Religion, it is at baseline, an "... ordering of reality" that "... emerges out of chaos and continues to confront the latter as its terrible contrary" (Berger 36). Religion stands within us as guardian over our existential and metaphysical angst; a pacifying cartographer that maps order onto the human's world, keeping one "protected against the nightmare threats of chaos" (36). For the believer, Religion possesses a "unique capacity... to 'locate' human phenomena within a cosmic frame of reference," for we, with Religion, are, "grounded in a sacred time" (Berger 36, 46). Thus, this "... sacred cosmos" organically arrives to the human as the one "... immensely powerful reality other than himself" (35). Besides ourselves, then, Religion is our most _meaningful_ meaning-creator, our orderer of reality and legitimizer of our world; to the extent that it stamps within us a blueprint of reality, it may access the furthest caverns, the innermost foundational layers of our substantive, subjective realities.

With all this to offer the otherwise chaotic lives of humans, how exactly does Religion have such wide open gaps for attack and manipulation? That the meme has existed so long with no resolution to patching its soft spots, ACEL's mission accelerates towards this theoretical issue: Where _exactly_ is — in the memetic construction _itself —_ this locus of vulnerability by which our species' most powerful "world-maker" can be so weaponized against us, even to make populations do terrible things?&#x20;

### Plausibility Structures, Theodicy,  Alienation &#x20;

It appears the answer is, as suspected, more subtle than the sentiments behind the dismissive epithets above. To be very clear here, while we will point out _inherent vulnerabilities_, or gaps in memetic self-protection, of which we will see Religion does in fact have a few, should not be equated with its possessing some fundamental, _inherent baseness,_ or _evil._ To equate these as such would be to ridicule the slug as a villain for not having a shell (it is granted here that slugs to our knowledge have never waged a Holy War). So, while it may appear tedious, this final explication of a religious devotee's _alienation from self_ will show us the precise structural location and method by which Religion is taken advantage. .&#x20;

Berger frequently revisits the "precarious" nature of the _plausibility structure up_on which Religion rests. By _plausibility structure_, he means the "social 'base' \[each world requires] for its continuing existence as a world that is real to actual human beings" (57-58). In other words, "\[A world's] continuing reality... depends upon _specific_ social practices... processes that ongoingly reconstruct and maintain the particular worlds in question" (57). As shown above, Religion's "plausibility" rests upon its ability to _hide_ its manmade _created-ness_; and Berger notes that, "Since every religious world is “based” on a plausibility structure that is itself the product of  human activity, every religious world is inherently precarious in its reality... conversion... is always possible. This possibility increases with the degree of instability or discontinuity of the plausibility structure in question" (63).&#x20;

It takes little to guess that great efforts will be made, great lengths will be gone to by religious leaders whose plausibility structure begins to show signs of wear. It is here where institutions will deploy _theodicies_, an explanation of "anomic" (i.e. socially, or worse, cosmically disorganized) phenomena. Essentially, these are "stories" posited to a given religious society to re-legitimate itself; and Berger notes that _all_ theodicies, without fail, carry a "fundamental attitude, in itself quite irrational. This attitude is the surrender of self to the ordering power of society" (Berger 67). This, for Berger, is foundational to — really, the source of — the notion of religious transcendence.&#x20;

While normally we might consider transcendence to be a positive, Berger sees it to carry a self-denying tone, and problematically so, saying, "Every society entails a certain denial of the individual self and its needs, anxieties, and problems" (68). For the author, this self-denial bridges over to masochism: "The masochistic surrender is an attempt to escape aloneness by absorption in an other... the masochistic attitude is one of the persistent factors of irrationality in the problem of theodicy" (71-72).&#x20;

Unsurprisingly, this irrationality is where things begin to get hairy for religion's protection of self from bad actors: If one's personal religious system is left only to be carried by an errant theodicy — one that requires adherents to 'surrender themselves to the group' — while on the one hand it might offer a sort of bliss, or religious ecstasy, it leaves a door wide open for nefarious players to take advantage of true believers; Berger notes of this, "One of the very important social functions of theodicies is, indeed, their explanation of the socially prevailing inequalities of power and privilege" (73).&#x20;

It would be understandable to ask here how the signs of corruption would not be spotted, but Berger explains, that in a religion-based society "The political authority is conceived of as the agent of the gods... Human power, government, and punishment thus become sacramental phenomena, that is, channels by which divine forces are made to impinge upon the lives of men. The ruler speaks for the gods, or _is a god_, and to obey him is to be in a right relationship with the world of the gods" (Berger 45). True belief is true belief, after all.&#x20;

From this, the unsuspecting and morally upright adherents will experience what Berger calls _alienation_, a "process whereby the dialectical relationship between the individual and his world is lost to consciousness" (103-104). In having surrendered oneself to an external structure, a "duplication of consciousness results in an internal confrontation between socialized and non- socialized components of self" (102). That is to say, that "self" that was surrendered was not in fact a _whole_ surrender, for Joe the devotee is not united with the cosmic embrace of God: He is still everyday Joe, the coffee shop owner; only now, according Berger, Joe, either knowingly or not, walks through life with a double consciousness, "produces 'otherness' both outside and inside himself as a result of his life in society" (103). And should he become mixed up and start believing himself to be that Joe that he is not: that he is truly that other, failed-surrender being, he has then produced what Berger calls a "false consciousness" (106). It is at this point that Joe has more or less ceased to be Joe and is now no more than a husk that does the bidding of his religious overlords (it is redundant to qualify the character of the religious leaders here as potentially being virtuous, as they would not have allowed this alienation of Joe from himself were that the case). Whether that means kill or be killed, fight in a war, Joe has been exploited by bad actors using Religion.&#x20;

## Conclusion of the Theoretical Inquiry

So it is, the locus and the method by which Religion may be used as a form of control, a tool of oppression. Found mostly in religions that self-consciously fear  their _plausibility structure_ is losing ground, they deploy theodicies of self-denial, instilling fear of anomie should the adherent resist. This results in mind numb pawns who are alienated from themselves.&#x20;

While again, it cannot be said with definitive proof that this process of alienating one's religious devotees from themselves is part and parcel of the religious, or Christian modus operandi. Still religion has been deployed countless times throughout history as just such a tool. This is characteristic of time periods like the Dark Ages, where full centuries of repression and fear intimidated the mere thought of nonreligious ideas. So, too, in the Spanish inquisition, communities of "competing" faiths were tortured and killed at the hands of Joe and others like him; order-following minions so alienated from themselves through false theodicies that they brutally murdered innocent people simply at the word of command.&#x20;

It is these individuals, these religious husks of self-alienation who wind up caught up in what might be called a "do-loop" — an incessant "do this; do that" mindset, without end. They survive for nothing but what their religious leaders tell them to survive for; all energy is expended to those ends, energy that could have otherwise been directed to improve the world, advance technology, foster cultural growth; but was sapped by a vulnerable religious sect. With less agency in the world thanks to these instantiations of religious power grabs by way of humans, innovation stalls, slowly, and ironically, rotting their societies into the mud of cosmic angst.&#x20;

Medically speaking, the physiological and psychological fallout of living in the husk of your alienated self, driven without agency by a false consciousness over time would likely lead to severe stress, anxiety, and depression. Generally, a population as such, living with one of two choices in the false consciousness: alienation or divine punishment, will likely render chronic stress or anxiety, harming both brain and body.&#x20;

It should be remembered that Berger's terminology of "social control" was _not_ at the outset qualified as negative. There is thus opportunity for one to see an understanding of Religion as an en masse method of social control-proper is in facy possible — though it likely would present as much different than the types of control discussed in this chapter. This type of control could lead the particular religious community to be more coordinated, more united due to a common acquired moral compass, a shared lifeworld by which to align their meaning. Indeed, it does this without the need to be controlled, and is yet another positive that many of our earlier thinkers overlooked. Undoubtedly, Religion can build a cohesive framework for communities; so long as the collective focus remains a tool for coordination in efforts to maximize our collective intelligence.&#x20;

Even should this social control _not_ be of positive intent, there is still good that may come out of a rehabilitation of a religious community. Berger calls this de-alienation. He states, "In the Biblical tradition the confrontation of the social order with the majesty of the transcendent God may also relativize this order to such an extent that one may validly speak of de-alienation—in the sense that, before the face of God, the institutions are revealed as nothing but human works, devoid of inherent sanctity or immortality" (Berger 105). What he means here, is that tension between the social and the religious may, in a way reminiscent of Hegel's Dialectic, lead both groups to a fuller realization of themselves. For example, this occurred in medieval Europe when the fear of heresy and excommunication dominated society. While clearly anything but pleasant, this era eventually spurred civilization to accelerate toward much needed scientific and intellectual advances.

Religion is the most powerful memetic structure known to humanity. It has existed since its gave first meaning and order; in that moment and for perhaps some after that, it was an asymptotically pure, unadulterated representation of the cosmos, and our place in it. Since then, outgrowths have shaped, cultures, languages around it; it has bestowed as gifts meaning and order to countless humans who've lived here. We granted that it is able to be abused: We have outlined the context and methods by which that takes place above. It is important to keep these warning signs in mind as we move forward and continue to celebrate the memetic existence of Religion — always with an eye to the possibility that it may veer astray with the unhelpful push of bad actors. We must live in a full and complete knowledge that the memetic power of religion comes from its capacity to inspire, unite, give meaning. Should this focus remain, likely are we to accelerate toward our goal of maximizing human intelligence faster.  When the critical mass of the _alienated_ — as it is in the above context — unfetter their false consciousnesses from the control of their religious zealots, the amount of human agency we will have to increase human growth will truly be tremendous.  &#x20;

* `Christianity, Judaism, and Islam. As the Biblical traditions conclusively make up the most widespread memetic instantiation of Religion, we may use this term interchangeably with Religion in a general sense`
