# Woke Ideology: A Potent Decelerant

## The Structural Integrity of Our Memetic Foundations

### Setting the Scene

_Whether acknowledged or not, at this very moment, every human on planet Earth carries their existence — and all possible future existences that live within them_ in potentia _— over a thin and continually thinning ground; this, our species long-treasured, last-stop topographical shroud sheltering the bunker that contains humanity's most salient memetic structures: the hand-plucked, deposit prepense longest half-lives. Now, but a slow collapse witnessed; it steadily disintegrates under our feet, with fingerprints evidencing foul play._&#x20;

### Contextualizing the Analogy

What does this image mean, or refer to, exactly? What is the analogy being made?

The above micro-scene analogizes an _attempted burglary_ made on virtually every memetic pillar holding up the modern Western world, those memes most vital to the the basic structures of collective rational thought and healthy, socially-adaptive living.&#x20;

To offer insight into the magnitude of this decelerant _grand heist_, here is but a sliver of the sprawl of ideological targets: religion ([Schmitz](https://www.tabletmag.com/sections/news/articles/woke-religion-america)), medicine ([Kao](https://www.heritage.org/gender/commentary/woke-gender)), education ([Mintz](https://www.insidehighered.com/blogs/higher-ed-gamma/does-wokeness-threaten-academic-freedom)), energy usage ([Tyrrell](https://www.heritage.org/progressivism/commentary/what-wrong-esg-wokeism)), freedom ([Weissenberger](https://c2cjournal.ca/2023/10/wokism-a-symptom-of-late-stage-capitalism/)), creativity ([Thoraval](https://www.smh.com.au/education/i-m-a-university-lecturer-and-wokeism-is-stifling-free-debate-in-my-classroom-20230316-p5csor.html)), entertainment ([Wilford](https://torontosun.com/entertainment/movies/is-the-woke-revolution-killing-hollywood)), logic ([Hanson](https://www.independent.org/news/article.asp?id=13968)), social norms ([Neiman](https://time.com/6290367/susan-neiman-tension-at-the-heart-of-wokeism/)), biology ([Spiked](https://www.spiked-online.com/2020/11/19/beware-trans-ideas-in-sheeps-clothing/)), literary aesthetics ([Aristophenes](https://thefederalist.com/2022/10/25/its-time-to-save-literature-from-the-woke-publishing-industry/)), debate ([Linday 2](https://newdiscourses.com/2020/07/woke-wont-debate-you-heres-why/)), mathematics ([Barron](https://www.acton.org/religion-liberty/volume-34-number-1/philosophical-roots-wokeism)), government ([McGinnis](https://lawliberty.org/why-wokeism-threatens-the-rule-of-law/)), value systems ([Poojar](https://samvadaworld.com/national/the-origin-and-evolution-of-wokeism-unveiling-its-theoretical-foundations-and-implications-for-bharat/)), the individual moral compass ([Funk](https://www.convergemedia.org/wokeism-the-new-religion-of-the-west/)) -- truly _gargantuan_ memes on which we base our lives, from the simple "waving hello" all the way to arithmetical proofs. More, this subterfuge has made it overtly clear that it is an _all-or-nothing_ enterprise: _All_ of humanity's memes are the target; and, as has been shown, they are pursued by an ideology willing to acquire them through force.&#x20;

How do the perpetrators of this ideology actually intend to inhibit such a strong suite of agencies, such rich-in-half-life forces; how have they tried to prohibit all of the creative outputs contained within our memetic and genetic repositories? Quite childishly, it seems ([Boudreaux](https://www.aier.org/article/the-childishness-of-wokeism/)). They have found great success already through their weaponization of the public sphere: With open-forum harassments, media pressure, and accusations that threaten - and have actually killed - long, successful careers, this ideology claims itself judge, jury, and executioner -- _without any basis_ other than their own self-aggrandizing memetic repository -- in its rendering verdicts to those individuals and the thoughts they posit that oppose this ideology in even the slightest way. In so doing, they have successfully ground to a halt  careers, so many creative outputs proferred by accelerant agents, so many (in their eyes) potentially-risqué acts of individual, creative thought. These would-be contributions to our memetic and genetic repositories and instead bastardized into fractured, impotent, deformed memetic holograms of their once strong selves. And, while the above grocery list of memetic loot is almost laughable in the absurdity of its range, the fact remains that, with each attempted nab, this ideology has in fact gained ground ([Doubek et al.](https://www.npr.org/2021/11/05/1052650979/mcwhorters-new-book-woke-racism-attacks-leading-thinkers-on-race)); with each effort it inches closer to achieving its goal. In other words, its coercive maneuvering, its squeaky-wheeled bullying might actually, eventually effect its success.&#x20;

### Naming the Threat

But, what _is_ our threat, exactly -- who composes this group of bandits who wish to subvert the memetic foundations on which modernity stands? Who are these inhibitors of agency, of creative output -- who stop us from adding to the collective memetic and genetic repositories? We speak here of the wolf in sheep's clothes: _Woke Ideology_, a collegiate-to-cultural movement ([Lindsay](https://newdiscourses.com/2021/04/rise-woke-cultural-revolution/)) -- once thought by many to be (and perhaps was, for a moment) a crowning-achievement of modern-day morality -- that now claims, in the open, authoritative intentions to assume creative control over our species' cultural catalog, so as to rewrite our species' memetic knowledge according to their accepted framework.&#x20;

In order to best confront and defeat the very real threats posed by Woke Ideology, we must first seek to understand its roots, so that we might cut them at their base.

## Our Chasm of _Meaning_ & its Exploitation&#x20;

As stated previously, humanity possesses inextinguishable curiosity: We have since our beginnings strove to peel back the layers of universal mystery kept beyond our grasp. With each advancing success in this pursuit, we at once cut ourselves in half by the double-edged sword of knowledge: With each unit of _knowing_ gained, we inherently experience a loss of awe, an agnosticism grown in the spirit, a disconnection to those things considered _holy_ or _sacred_. Our secularity, therefore, is born of our curiosity; and, so successful have we been in its appeasements, that we have utterly compartmentalized away both knowledge and awe.&#x20;

The contemporary body of human sciences agrees that this epistemic schism stems from 17th century French philosopher René Descartes' proclamation, "Cogito, ergo sum," or, "I think, therefore I am" (Ingold 77). This has led to, among other existential rifts in modern society, a separation between _Nature_ and _Mind_, _Self_ and _Other_, _Church_ and _State_. Each of these dichotomies weighs its own promise and its own burden on humanity's existential shoulders, but it is for the latter -- that of the separation of Church and State -- that we currently stand face-to-face with a great threat to our memetic foundations. While this separation has of course afforded humanity many priceless contributions to its memetic reservoir (the unfolding of democracy, to name one), it has also led to a _vacuum of meaning_, a chasm in our collective morality; for, our innate meaning now exists compartmentalized and cut off from a majority of our day-to-day life.&#x20;

Naturally, from this truth of modernity have begotten various attempts to fill our collective cavity of meaning, and indeed we are offered myriad options for the task at hand. Of all of these, of all the potential intensities that could materialize a successful _filling_ of this chasm -- "successful" only as measured by an _its being done_ -- the most likely to succeed also carries the most threatening potentiality to slide the orientation of our moral compass -- indeed, should our _national governments_ soon assume the role of creator and purveyor of meaning in our memetic world, our moral compass would soon experience less of a sliding than it would a _being pushed_.&#x20;

## Government Imposition of a "Religion of the State"

We are indeed witnessing a forceful push today by a critical mass of governing bodies the world over to fill this very vacuum. With great success, these governments have grabbed hold of the memetic roots of our species' unadulterated collective morality, our intuitive sense of goodness, displacing what could be called our "original morality" with a fabricated societal moralism: a "Religion of the State", an agency-halting, virtue-signaling, guilt-tripping "moral legislation" that threatens our species' intuitive sense of good vs. evil, right vs. wrong, and our creative output to learn the difference.&#x20;

That it is the nature of governments to control their subjects to some degree is not news by any standard. However, the recent instantiation of control, this _political capture by moralism_, highlights an obvious vulnerability in our collective self-assurance: Our chasm of meaning (brought on by Church and State) is now being exploited by governments, those Religion-Imposters that now attempt _social control_ on the grounds of _morality_. And because of all this, our societal self-assurance is unraveling at an alarming rate, leaving us open to memetic attack; and the damage caused by these hegemonic transgressions will take decades if not centuries to undo.

But why now? What do governments now possess that they did not before that affords them this opportunity to lead this full-frontal assault on humanity's innate sense of goodness? It appears that governments are appropriating the highly-effective moralistic tactics and methods executed by Woke Ideology, or _Wokeism_, by its quasi-religious name.

## Woke Ideology: Basis, Methods, Dangers&#x20;

This potency-quashing subterfuge that governments are injecting into our developed society's fabric is no doubt fueled by Woke Ideology ([Sen](https://www.globalorder.live/post/how-the-woke-are-impacting-politics-and-foreign-policy)). While Wokeism may have bubbled up from university classrooms ([Lindsay](https://newdiscourses.com/2021/04/rise-woke-cultural-revolution/)), its parasitic, agency-sapping strength as a stand-in for religion has undoubtedly infected a critical mass of the most powerful governments in the developed world.&#x20;

Wokeism is tricky, its inculcation tempting; if it is anything at all, it is _not_ the same movement it was but a few years ago. The Economist wrote in a 2021 article, "Until a few years ago 'woke' meant being alert to racial injustice and discrimination... In 1938 singer Huddie Ledbetter warned black people they 'best stay woke, keep their eyes open' going through Scottsboro, Alabama, the scene of a famous mistrial involving nine young black men" ([The Economist](https://www.economist.com/the-economist-explains/2021/07/30/how-has-the-meaning-of-the-word-woke-evolved)). It certainly has not remained here, focused on the at-baseline legitimate platform of anti-racism. Instead, Wokeism has grown to become all but a catch-all phrase for what it deems as championing _all_ _things_ pro-inclusivity, pro-sustainability, pro-environment. Even in its growth, Wokeism has largely been able to retain in its public-image an ethos that appears benign, even helpful or beneficial to humanity (echos of Effective Altruism).

Yet, when scrutinized under a pro-humanity lens, it is subtly revealed that Wokeism, while diffusing its influence in the name of inclusivity, is in fact driven by a desire for totalitarian control executed through a lens of anti-human moralism. Their framework, trenchant in what now seems to be nothing more than a "power for power's sake" leads every facet of human output down a faucet of utter stagnation -- each success in the name of Wokeism is yet another gunpoint-holdup of a piece of our memetic knowledge, watched as its flushed down the sink drain of Marxist repute. In other words, the woke movement, in its use of public stigma, freezes in motion those agencies that would otherwise would contribute to our memetic repositories.&#x20;

Eventually, we will become tapped, fully diluted of creative output and risk-taking through fear of stigma. Thus is the end goal of Wokeism: a paralysis of thought and action, a Marxist celebration of middling. Fully adopted, Wokeism threatens the existence of human consciousness itself.&#x20;

## A Destructive Ideological Turnover Under Our Feet

Returning to our original illustrative analogy, we thus attribute this disintegration and decay of our once sturdy memetic base to an approaching zero hour of ideological turnover, where the half-lives of our cultural repository's most impactful memes inch closer and closer to their metamorphosis, their sublimation at the hand of Woke Ideology. That is to say, the modern memetic foundations of our collective understanding of self -- our social identity, our moral compass, our value systems -- near their unintended but aggregated transmutation.

Or, this is already underway. And we are, as a species together, living immediate and shared witness to the emergent materialization of latent potentials that have laid-in-wait under our modern memetic foundation, and its supposed structural integrity. It may be -- as the great memetic educator, Nature, and its governing body of physics, has cautioned us against -- that we have too long leaned too heavy a concentrated weight on our memetic base; and, in breaching the threshold of its structural integrity, we have broken it, and allowed this bubbling volcanism of multiplicities to rise and contend for dominance (_As sand that slips through fingers when squeezed, perhaps we are to blame for our risking the loss of our memetic orientation_). It is here where Wokeism is putting forth a concerted, intimidating effort.&#x20;

This is all the more regrettable when considering our contemporary explosion of human intellect. Even while the "Religion of the State" extends its reach, our species' intellectual advancements run parallel to that extension, as we far outpace any other era that was defined by human advancement. Still, Woke Ideology threatens its continuation, posing a sincere threat to our ability to accelerate our intelligence.

Truly, where once Wokeism snarled its teeth in isolated incidents, now our larger societal structures are deemed at risk, if not considered already subsumed. We have already seen that our governmental structures have all but succumb to the squeaky wheel of Wokeism, whose values nearly one-to-one overlap their decelerant intents (i.e. both campaigns are backed by consumption, fear, and control). More importantly, though, it is _our education system_, that, like wounded animal, sits in the open unprotected from motivated ideological predators who aim to embed via woke, contra-family surrogates a manufactured moral bearing. In controlling the upbringing minds of our youth, now, there exists a way to inculcate woke ideology into our species at the very start of life. We cannot allow this.&#x20;

For the minds of future generations are sensitive to specific inputs. They deserve the light of their consciousness to be activated, to be given the opportunity to contribute creatively to our collective memesis. Perhaps inadvertently and well-intentioned, the Western education system has allowed the woke enemy to walk through its doors; and it now sits in its own remiss no longer a proper guidance system for our youth. The system itself requires self-judgement, efficient corrective action, even its own forgiveness to cast out the parasitic ideology it has let consume it. There is still time to teach the young minds and embed them with all the necessary knowledge and skills to create powerful memes, to spread them as fast as possible, to double down on those that flourish. The creative spirit needs cultivating, as do critical thought and problem-solving skills; for our children, we must attend to this structural problem.&#x20;

## Path Forward: Open, Free, Memetic Output, Always &#x20;

One more time we return to our scene-setting memetic-foundation-as-floor: Such is the case then that two primary contenders sit bubbling in the volcanic intensities within our cracking ground. First, the decelerant propagation of a woke, anti-human Religion of the State that threatens not just our species' output but our entire memetic self-awareness, that dilutes us all into a dull, gray, fear-based paralysis. The other: An accelerated promise of advancement, liberty in thought and curiosity, maximization of intelligence, prioritization of our youth's potential, which is far beyond our own.&#x20;

Such are our two options. Either iteration provides humanity clear direction.

Which shall we choose?&#x20;

Here we must not forget the Buddha's teaching of the "Parable of the Poisoned Arrow" in the Sutta Pitaka (Majihima Nikaya 2). Certainly, it is little use to seek the source or cause of one's imminent pain farther than it may issue resolution. It is imperative instead to remain practical and problem solve one's survival. Therefore, we must at all costs do just this: Assess our contemporary memetic threat only insofar as it helps rectifies the situation; then, we maximize our efforts in a chosen direction. For, while it is certain that a turning point is either coming or is here, what may not be certain is which memetic foundation will triumph.&#x20;

With that said, it is the role of ACEL here, if for only the sake of our youth to be afforded open memetic opportunities, to counter counterproductive trends. Therefore, ACEL will, in the coming chapters, form and establish frameworks of productivity. Such frameworks should be propagated with maximum transparency and public participation as to ensure the vision is materialized. ACELs must inspire and mobilize humanity, appealing to as many as possible -- this in itself will mitigate power from Decels. Then, in opposition to Decels who gate-keep knowledge for their selfish consumption, ACEL must lay out, using an open-source memetic repository, a plan for simplifying governance. This open and free sharing of ideas will drive innovation, understanding, and further interest -- in turn, accelerating itself.&#x20;

And so, after all, it _is_ clear: The ACEL mindset and framework will prosper and triumph and overcome: This is because, as opposed to its destined-to-fail memetic thief, ACEL _opens_ us to a culture of openness: creation, output, propagation. Has any stagnant organism ever dominated a faster, more agile one, one that posses more cunning, more intuition? ACEL will out-play, out-maneuver and out-create Wokeism or any future ideological threat, for these are all but fixated on consumption, wealth, fear, stagnation, paralysis, comfort. And we know that stagnation equals death, and acceleration equals life. &#x20;

In so succeeding a continued opportunity to accelerate, we may yet afford ourselves again a firm stance atop our memetic foundation; and this time, perhaps we reunite, reconnect that knowledge and that awe that we so long ago lost, creating and reaffirming again our shared cultural world. Durkheim notes of this, "This creation is not a sort of optional extra step by which society, being already made, merely adds finishing touches; it is the act by which society makes itself, and remakes itself, periodically" (425).&#x20;

With that said, we still must defend our territory at all costs. This is the method by which we succeed.&#x20;

