# A Brief History of Deoxyribonucleic Acid

## First Evidences of _Deliberate_ Biological Data Transfer

While the term _genetic pathway_ might be one unfamiliar to some, that organisms possess and pass certain traits to their offspring, is not: Our species' understanding and selective application of heredity dates back at least "10,500-10,100 years" to "a string of Early Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB) farming villages that developed in south-west Asia" (Zohary et al. 1). Within these early farming communities' domestication of emmer wheat and other cereals and legumes (e.g. lentils, peas) is the evident betrayal of humanity's first applied knowledge of _the direct transference of data from living thing to living thing_ (Zohary et al. 1).&#x20;

This agricultural training quickly extended to these early communities' coeval domestication of sheep and goats — and soon after that, to other lands. Late Professor Emeritus of the University of Jerusalem Daniel Zohary stated in _Domestication of Plants in the Old World_ that "A most remarkable feature of south-west Asian Neolithic agriculture is its rapid expansion soon after establishment in the nuclear area" (Zohary et al. 2, 4). Unsurprisingly, then, once these early humans discovered such life-optimizing ideas, it took little time for these literal and memetic seeds to spread elsewhere, where they were further adapted and trained to accommodate foreign typographies (Zohary 4).&#x20;

Obviously, this spreading, growing, and adapting of selective breeding continued through time, captured at pivotal junctures in the works of historical agriculturalists and f. For instance, first century Lucius Columella laid out in _Res Rustica_ Ancient Rome's only comprehensive farming manual, which "contains instructions for selecting, breeding, and rearing cattle, horses, and mules" (Ash 17). Ibn al-Awwam's exhaustive medieval agricultural compendium, _Kitāb al-Filāḥa_, details in 12th century Arabic numerous methods of animal husbandry, how soil health and manure affects plant life and heredity, even how one may graft disparately-sourced olives into a new breed (Al Awam). Additionally, Robert Bakewell, whose pioneering method of livestock breeding in the mid-18th century was influential to Darwin's theory of natural selection (Wood), helped to bring humanity's collective knowledge up to the doorstep of genetics.

## Mendel & The Dawn & Evolution of Genetics

So it is that, while humanity has _in some way_ been aware of living organisms' hereditary repositories, as we know from the continual expansion of this knowledge over ten millennia, it wasn't until the turn of the 20th century, with the rediscovery of Gregor Mendel's 1866 research on pea plants, that our species would enter a new age of biological understanding. For, with Mendel's conclusion that there exist "dominant" and "recessive" pieces of data – what Danish botanist Wilhelm Johannsen would soon after in 1909 term _genes_ (Rolls-Hansen Nils) – within the structure of all biological life, humanity finally possessed the _material_ _unit_, and its location, by which the transfer of biological information could be scientifically understood. &#x20;

Although Mendel's novel contributions were only posthumously and finally accepted decades after their original publication, once embedded, humanity would quickly accelerate in this sphere of biological knowledge. In addition to _gene_, which is Johannsen would add the concepts of _genotype_ and _phenotype_ to the vocabulary of _genetics_ (Rolls-Hansen Nils), a term coined in 1906 by William Bateson, who helped synthesize Darwin's theory of evolution with Mendel's heredity (Bateson). Just over four decades later, James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953 proposed to the scientific world the double helix structure of DNA, ushering into our scientific repository the era of molecular biology (Watson). Since then, in addition to its numerous outgrowths and influences on other research areas, this branch of science has been exploding with interest and advancements. One of the many major research milestones in molecular biology was only just comprehensively completed in 2022 after 32 years of effort. In 1990, The United States initiated the Human Genome Project, an international effort to sequence the entirety of the human genome, and what is now understood to be "the largest single undertaking in the history of biological science" (Battelle Technology Partnership Practice). Of course, with the scaling that technology has seen in recent years, this claim will, much like a gene, be transcribed and translated to new projects; indeed, it already has.&#x20;

## A Theoretical Side Note on Chromosomal _Time_

While much of this book is focused on what is to come for the _biological machines_, it is just as interested in – per Alfred North Whitehead's notion of the _fluency_ of time – the many _transitioning occasions_ that led biological life to its collective _unfolding-now_, "the origination of the present in conformity with the 'power' of the past" (Whitehead 210). This nuanced framing of "what existed prior to this moment" is not adopted from Whitehead simply for the sake of being pedantic; rather, the classical understanding of "the past" — specifically, its positing a discontinuous demarcation between itself and the observed present, as something cut off from it, some repository discrete and a distance behind it, back there but _not here —_ conflicts with ACEL's temporo-holistic understanding of humanity, as shown in chapter one.&#x20;

For ACEL, time is a continuum-proper: A fluent, transitional, relative "collapse" of multiplicitous _endurings_ or _potentialities_ into a unified, observable, transitive theater – this perpetual "formation" Whitehead calls _concrescence,_ theoretically comparable to the household "moment" (Whitehead 211). In this model, there exists no demarcation, the line in the sand is brushed away with the sweep a foot and immediately the past rushes up to meet and join the _unfolding-now_. In so doing, it regains an equal and utmost importance as that which greets it. Settling within this temporal framework for the current discussion, then, allows the genetic pathway, DNA itself, to an their older brother into their own story (indeed, this "fossil" still very much lives within all life, as will be shown). By situating a chromosomal "past", and of course some unknown "future" within a nondemarcated present, humanity might later navigate its next evolution beyond DNA.

## The RNA World Hypothesis

Following Watson and Crick's public unveiling of the double helix structure of DNA in 1953, the field's most notable molecular biologists – driven by that inexhaustible human thirst for knowledge – did anything but pack it in after such a sweeping victory over a ten millennia-long curiosity: As scientists are wont to do, many, including Crick, turned their research empirical gazes to genetic _origins —_ namely, the structural primitives of biological life itself. In other words, they sought to discover the predecessor of DNA prior to its assuming dominance as the primary genetic carrier.&#x20;

One might think now that at this time, only having known of the double helix structure for a few years, and being without a fraction of the technological hardware that today's molecular studies possess, these researchers were not only foolish, but also impudent in believing they might asymptotically approach any accuracy with regard to finding a precursory molecular structure of life. And yet, in impressive human fashion, by only 1968, they published credible findings showing that even DNA, the material infrastructure of biological life itself, does not itself exist outside the bounds of evolution, that it was not always the the champion of life's story; but, indeed, most likely had an older brother: Ribonucleic Acid, or RNA (Crick).

Now the leading theoretical theory on the evolutionary development of DNA, the RNA World Hypothesis "posits that there was a period of time in primitive Earth’s history — about 4 billion years ago — when the primary living substance was RNA or something chemically similar... \[that it] carried out most of the information processing and metabolic transformations needed for biology to emerge from chemistry". Once they found that RNA "has both a genotype and a phenotype", these scientist began to see this structure as a "plausible precursor to a much more complex system". Biophysicist Paul Higgs and professor at McMaster University writes in the 2014 publication of _Nature Reviews: Genetics_, that Sol Spiegelman paved the way to "\[demonstrate] that RNA could behave in a Darwinian manner in the absence of cells. Once this realization has been made, pioneers such as Orgel, Eigen, Joyce, Gold and Szostak fully demonstrated the evolutionary capabilities of RNA and made it difficult to ignore the possibility that life started with RNA." Sure enough, by the 1980s, "the credentials of RNA as a catalyst \[for the production of DNA] became firmly established" (Higgs 1).&#x20;

Evidence continues to corroborate The RNA World Hypothesis. In 2022, "Researchers at the University of Tokyo had been for the first time been able to create an RNA molecule that replicates, diversifies, and develops complexity, following Darwinian evolution. This has provided the first empirical evidence that simple biological molecules can lead to the emergence of complex lifelike systems" (University of Tokyo). This catalytic nature of RNA was also corroborated by the University of Chicago just earlier this year (Papastavrou et al.).&#x20;

The monumental implications of these findings supporting the RNA World Hypothesis can be hard to place at first. What they indicate, among other worldview-changing intimations, is that not only are _cellular_ systems privy to Darwinian evolution, but that _pre-cellular_ systems are as well. In other words, it is more or less confirmed now pre-life, given enough time, evolves into life; how non-DNA-carrying structures, i.e. meteorites that contain RNA, have the capacity to evolve into life given enough runway.&#x20;

## Evolution of The First Organisms&#x20;

Taking the above findings into consideration, the classical understanding that life started from single-celled organisms and developed in complexity no longer represents the complete picture of the origins of early life. While true in itself, that single-celled organisms did develop in complexity over time, humanity's repository of knowledge must now encompass pre-cellular RNA structures as those first replicators. Even more fascinating is that these pre-cellular structures seem to replicate only when they _cooperate_ with one another, when they express altruism (Higgs et al. 6); in other words, they defied the "selfishness" most evolutionary biologists cling to as the universal nature of life, and somehow cheat the universe, which other organisms would later do. As shown above, these new findings are beginning to show it is the self-replicating catalytic nature of RNA that somehow must have replicated and grown into a protocell some four billion years ago (Higgs 1, 3).&#x20;

It is within this theoretical possibility, that of _RNA-as-progenitor_, that life as we know it — i.e. extant biological organisms possessing our familiar genetic pathway — was born on Earth around 3.5 billion years ago. These were single-celled prokaryotes (e.g. cells _without_ a nucleus) that held sole evolutionary domain of Earth for approximately the next 1.5 billion years. While impossibly basic, these structures of biological life during this time were still able to discover, learn from, and adapt to their harsh environments — those who developed resilience to these adversities, survived. From this evolutionary process eventually emerged single-celled eukaryotes (i.e. cells _with_ a nucleus), whom, over the following billion years, learned how to accelerate their evolution if they were to add "noise" to their genetic sequences; these single-celled protists would initiate the beginnings of sexual reproduction, receiving two samples instead of one.&#x20;

Lo and behold that not long after, relatively speaking — e.g. , between 200 and 600 million years ago – these sexually reproducing single-celled protists would eventually evolve into _multicellular_ eukaryotes (Ratcliff et al. 1). On this genetic leap, University of Minnesota Ecology professors William Ratcliff et al. claim that while the timespan leading up to this evolutionary jump from single-cell to multi-cell took billions of years, their research showed that "the first crucial steps in the transition from unicellularity to multicellularity can evolve remarkably quickly under appropriate selective conditions" (Ratcliff et al 5). (In fact, he remarks that this stagnation and quick burst of progress is customary to biological evolution: "The fossil record shows that long periods of stasis are often punctuated by bursts of rapid evolution, presumably due to shifts in selective conditions and dramatic evolutionary responses" (Ratcliff 5).) &#x20;

Ratcliff concludes that "The evolution of multicellularity was transformative for life on earth. In addition to larger size, multicellularity increased biological complexity through the formation of new biological structures. For example, multicellular organisms have evolved sophisticated, higher-level functionality via cooperation among component cells with complementary behaviors" (Ratcliff et al. 1). Added to this note should be the substantive move on behalf of the protists' actionable sexual reproduction that initiated that first, and rapid, jump to multicellularity. As the emergence of sexual reproduction begot _noisier_ and _noisier_ multicellular structures, the universe's genetic repository blossomed unceasingly in all directions.&#x20;

Much is owed to these tiny multicellular organisms that seemed to intentionally combine genetic intelligences in order add more and more genetic flavor — and thereby resilience — to the collective genetic repository. In so doing, they would accelerate the amount of mutations all life would eventually present. It could not have been so, that multicellular organisms emerged and prospered prior to the protists "wiggling" genetic diversity into existence through their reproductive habits (i.e. in all likelihood they did emerge, but had no built-in resilience and died). Thus it was the case that mutations, whether successful or not, were worth the cost; for, when these mutations _did_ in fact produce resilient offspring, that genetic repository was exponentially more capable of surviving than the others (Gerton et al.). &#x20;

## The Longview of Humanity's Genetic Repository&#x20;

This exponential compounding of evolutionary mutations would continue unfolding in the continuous process of a billion and more years worth of time, only to eventually arrive to the genetic marvel of the homo sapien sapien. And so it was, from RNA; to prokaryotes; to single-celled protists; to multicellular eukaryotes; from everything in between those microscopic smooth operators all the way up to homo sapien sapiens, this species – and its consciousness – owes a great deal.&#x20;

While they had no means by which to know or understand, how these structurally simple organisms grew in complexity, variability and genetic fitness over time, out of nothing more than the unconscious will to survive; and in their success did they propagate the entirety of earth's biological machines, all of humanity — entirely oblivious in the star role. It appears that every biological machine is doing just the same and simply acting out an ever-increasingly difficult will to live, for this is exactly what early humans were doing when they first stood upright; when they learned to walk; learned to run; learned to swim; learned to farm and heard; and so on. This impressive bunch even learned to fly.&#x20;

Such is the spirit that buzzes through the collective _unfolding-now_, and has since that first RNA strand begot DNA. Four billion years of genetic life is heard in the cicada song, in a conversation between friends. Specifically for humankind, we are young, just over ten millennia in this entangled, ever-unfolding web of biological machines that has succeeded in surviving, in making chromosomal-potent, adaptive evolutionary choices through overlapping, collapsing intensities, ensuring their own survival and efforting their species to continue its process. Such is why this planet still today is burgeoning with adaptive and adapting biological life. In each continuous _fluency_ of time there exist countless unconscious genetic leaps being made by organisms the world over to continue their existing; and humanity seems now presented one the cards which seemingly no other biological machine has yet been dealt.

## The First to Take the Exit off the Genetic Beltway

Unlike the 4 billion year old prokaryote, the one species that can read these words is self-aware of its conscious, observable moving through the process of time. This gift endows it with both an opportunity and a responsibility, for it is _only_ this conscious-of-self species that is able to usher in, just as RNA did for DNA, the next great leap in data transference between _machina_.&#x20;

While we give thanks to them, we are no longer unicellular no-nucleus microscopic bugs; we are powerful, communicative agents. And while this species still depends on its genetic pathway to transfer biological material, the repository that deploys data along these lines has plateaued in evolutionary significance. Its dominance has been supplanted by a far more malleable, faster, more efficient pathway for our primary means of moving our intelligence between bodies. It is born of the way we communicate with one another; for ten thousand years and more, Homo Sapien Sapiens have communicated through body language, vocalization, technologies; until now, this has largely been taken for granted. But if this pathway is accelerated, is can become the method by which we can give the same gift that RNA gave us.&#x20;
