# The Parent-Child Relationship

## The Role of Parents

Parents play the most pivotal role in this evolutionary journey. By fusing their genetic material, they create offspring with an entirely new set of genetic information. All endowed with evolutionary "entropy," the next generation forms a pool for adaptation and survival. These fusions – genetic variations, are vital to evolutionary progress. (Provine)

Even beyond genetics, a child inherits a vast memetic repository---an archive of condensed cultural wisdom and knowledge-based insights. With every new generation, this repository grows, and thus, any new generation is better-tooled and better-informed than the last.&#x20;

Therefore, the responsibility of the parents is extended, they are more than just genetic sources. The begetter is under obligation to endow their children with at least a basic amount of memetic knowledge, which the children will use to adapt, respond, and navigate through their environment. Their dependence on their parents for memes is provisional, the the offspring will eventually outpace their parents in expanding their repository, progressing and achieving higher levels than their predecessors, in terms of genetic and memetic intelligence -- such a process of progression is vital to the evolutionary enhancement of the human species.&#x20;

In modern society, children who deviate from the norm are often held back and hindered. They are labelled and put on a spectrum (IQ, ADHD, autism) in an effort to control and manage anything that is seen as not usual. This sort of labelling is counter-productive and cruel, kids are diagnosed and given medication, which holds back their development. Studies have shown that children with an ADHD diagnosis have developmental delays of up to three years compared to their peers. (Thomas Armstrong, The Myth of the ADHD Child)

Diagnostic tests, such as the IQ test, provide narrow perspectives on intelligence. Even though they measure certain cognitive abilities, they do not have the capacity to analyze the full range of human intelligence. As a society, instead of confining ourselves to such definitions, we should celebrate intelligence as the ability to survive the universe's adversity --- no matter how; the ultimate objective of life is survival, and we should view intelligence through that lens. Intelligence comes in many forms, it is too versatile to keep within our definitions. For example, a crocodile can survive on a desert island with less effort than a human, who is more intelligent here?

These children, with remarkably extensive intelligence, have high-functioning abilities. Society has a responsibility to magnify and embolden their capacities, instead of subjecting them to narrow definitions. An education system has to be adopted that respects different types of intelligences, contribution to human progress is done collectively by every human on the intelligence spectrum. The diversity in human experiences and the difference in how individuals think should not be seen as a negative, but recognized for the strength that it is. Realizing intellectual diversity and allowing it to flourish allows for a stronger, more resilient society.

* FUSE The parents get to fuse their genetic sequences together, add some entropy to encourage evolutionary discovery and produce a second-generation entity.&#x20;
* GENETIC This entity is injected with a set of genetic instructions that are statistically more likely for them to survive and adapt to universal adversity than their parents. The child is more capable than the parent.&#x20;
* LARGER REPOSITORY Not only that, but the child gets access to an ever larger memetic repository than the parent, that uncovers more of the universe.
* MEMESIS The role of a Parent is to deliver a baseline of memetic knowledge to the Child to accelerate them to a point at which they know enough about their modern environment to safely express agency whilst they explore the universe.
* EXCEED The Parent must recognise that the Child is fully dependent on them for genes and memes, until a point at which they morph into their Peers, and ultimately, exceed them in capability. Children should always be more capable and complex than their parents, because of the progress of Humanity itself.&#x20;
* Parents do not own their Children, they can only campaign them with memes, until they can independently establish their own framework of understanding.&#x20;
* CHILDREN THAT DONT SURPASS A child that does not exceed their Parent in either Genetic and Memetic intelligence, whilst evolutionary a disadvantage, is still critical to humanity itself. All of humanity, up and down the stepladder of progress, is a celebration of agency. At any point on the stepladder of intelligence, the future of humanity can continue to evolve, from a starting point of  any creature.&#x20;
* DIAGNOSES Placing individuals on a spectrum of intelligence (IQ) and labelling them (eg ADHD, Autistic, Asbergers) is not only a disservice to them and a form of control, but also anti-humanity itself. Every biological machine is part of humanity, inside a continuum of Complexity vs Fragility. The more complex a creature is, the more fragile it is, and the more sensitive to adversity.&#x20;
* Labelling a high-functioning child as ADHD (and the rest) is both cruel and a disservice to their capabilities. By putting them in box, they can be “controlled” because those doing the labelling are simply manifesting their own fears. Oppression and Control is always down out of fear.&#x20;
* A high-functioning child has potentially more energy and more capability to express agency whilst exhibiting intelligence. They should be amplified and supported.&#x20;
* MEDICATING Medicating a high-functioning child is even crueller, seeking to decelerate their energy and output because it seems chaotic to the observer. Once again it is a form of control - trying to fit the high-functioning child in a box of average.&#x20;
* Every permutation of humanity should be free to be, to explore the universe and seek to explain it
