---
description: >-
  "Our brains are bigger, to be sure, but it is mainly due to their infestation
  by memes that they gain their powers." - Dan Dennett
---

# ACEL's Memetic Formula: Intelligence + Agency = Survival + Evolution

## Deploying Our Natural Appetite for Knowledge

For all of the evolutionary mechanisms that have shaped and reshaped human biological systems over our species' extant millennia, it is the manifest complexity of the brain — particularly the frontal lobe, the sensory cortex, and the hippocampus (just some of the neural structures determining how our brain seeks out, processes, and retains information) — that has turned humans into exploratory powerhouses ([de Villiers](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-981-19-2180-3\_2); [Jacobson](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-319-60187-8) et al.).

That humans wield the planet's the most complex hippocampus (this being the seat of compulsion to learn), our species asserts unparalleled ranges of agency, amplitudes and amperages away in our need to seek out and acquire knowledge. Another way of putting this is we are the biological machine _most programmed to be curious;_ we are also the best hardwired to gratify that curiosity. This is because within our Limbic System — a system consisting of the Hippocampus, Cingulate Gyrus, Thalamus, and the Basal Ganglia — resides a more or less inexhaustible, infinite reservoir of memory: infinite, if not for the finite body in which it is housed ([Shapiro](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-7091-1292-2\_19) et al.).&#x20;

From this last reflection comes manifest a pressure, an intensity born of finitude that moves one to act in frameworks of optimism. Resonating with the concept of "post-traumatic growth" in the field of psychology (Turner et al.), this reckoning with mortality is but one mode of inspiration by which one arrives to ACEL, to a more intimate engagement with, a more direct and earnest activation of the latent potentials within one's agency. Which cadence one's agency takes from here, whatever the genre of their manifestation, all is in every case propelled memetically forward by the individual's self-contained, deliberately-aimed active will: each curious step taken across the memetic topography is a _toward-intelligence, toward-knowledge_, ergot _toward-evolution._&#x20;

The memes one scoops up or drops like pollen or seeds along the way are, by nature, sticky, contagious "like viruses" (Dennett 4); one's simple walking along the learning path becomes itself a memetic world market whereby others too, whether intentionally or not (possibly even unconsciously), will enter the memetic exchange with you by proxy as your paths come into a shared range (we'll see later how the mediums of these paths are of zero importance) (Dennett 4). Such is our memetic evolution by intentional, yet minimally efforted intelligence carried out. It happens simply because we _move_.&#x20;

Additionally, as a self-aware agent extending out in relational lines, equipping more agency to oneself with each effected acquisition from and contribution to our collective memetic repository, we also possess within us a potent opportunity to _effortfully_ _evolutionize_ our species: that we may strategically, deliberately take our neurological blueprint _further_, accelerate ourselves into a galactic memetic repository to the nth degree. This accelerated, _only_-directional (as it moves towards its purpose _only_) compounding of our curiosity-born intelligence and our will-driven agency -- drums the steady beat of greatest _purpose_ through our biological givens that we cannot extinguish until we ourselves are.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                &#x20;

And why would we want to temper our body's organic will-to-learn, anyhow? As our body, being a gift to which we have temporary access, is formed in a way so as to have no ceiling to our capacity for intelligence, we must focus all of our efforts on feeding our appetite for knowledge; we are, quite literally, made to be learners. Such is why ACEL deems intelligence as its "output": because we can, we _must._ American philosopher Dan Dennett's reflection on memes as, "spreading simply because they could spread," is reminiscent of just this: as with the units of cultural knowledge, just so with their human carrier agents (9). As with memes, so are we, and so we are. In accepting and activating this role within ourselves, we _directly_ accelerate the evolution of our species; and, considering the finite nature of embodiment, we must prioritize above all an adherence to _efficiency_ in our pursuit of all intelligence.

## Navigating Memetic Metric Challenges

To this end of efficiency, the first thing accelerant seekers of knowledge must attend to is the theoretical mechanisms by which humans amass, retain, and transfer memetic knowledge; for, only if we know the machine can we most efficaciously apply our agency upon it. Immediately, however, an issue arises here: there is no formally-accepted unit of measurement in cultural evolution studies by which to quantify cultural/memetic knowledge. In other words, how are we to know if we are indeed, maximizing our potential? UPenn biologist Marco Smolla noted of this, that it is, "so tricky to find a useful concept of units of evolution in cultural evolution (a unit might be the single cultural trait or a set of traits, but also the carrier of a trait, etc.) (Smolla et al. 6).&#x20;

As such, we must choose one of two routes: either, 1) at substantial theoretical risk, compose some semblance of model where "knowable" information — that is, any available information that a given human may or may not know yet — is compartmentalized into quantifiable units so that their transference may be aggregated. With a system of knowledge-measurement in place, humans will be shown to _accelerate_ against a standardized backdrop of data. Or, 2) we might forego the attempt at a formula or loss-function altogether, and accept that the nature of cultural evolution studies is simply _too immediate_, _too everywhere_, _too always_ to fit in any given mathematical formula. Before deciding, we'll move through some historical and contemporary frameworks, and then decide a course of action.&#x20;

## The Promise of Cultural Evolution Studies

We have had one such model of measurement for well over a century: Ever since Danish botanist Wilhelm Johannsen published his seminal study on the hereditary traits of plants in 1909, wherein he neologized the term "gene" (as well as "genotype" and "phenotype"), our species has long and ubiquitously accepted that genes are _the_ repository of evolutionary blueprints, including that of humans (Rolls-Hansen). The _gene_ thus provides a working model for a unit of knowledge-measurement. But what of non-biological knowledge, and its transference? That Johannsen's plants did not have a cultural repository: does that mean we don't, either?

While Charles Darwin expounded notions antecedent and foundational to contemporary cultural evolution studies in his 1871 work, _The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex_ (Darwin)_,_ it wasn't until 1976 when Richard Dawkins published _The Selfish Gene_ that the gap of non-biological knowledge was sufficiently accounted for and filled. In this groundbreaking and still critically acclaimed book, Dawkins delineates a theoretical  process wherein a discrete set of evolutionary data is selected — he terms that which has been chosen, the _replicator —_ and then copied and transferred along an evolutionary _line_ or _pathway_. For both variables in said model, the replicator and the line, Dawkins claims there are not one, but _two of each: two_ families of replicators that travel on _two_ respective and distinct pathways. These are: 1) biological replicators: _genes_, and the genetic pathway; and 2) cultural replicators: _memes_, and the memetic pathway (Dawkins 19, 124, 140, 144). Dawkins surmises that, while "genes" are the units of biological evolution, "memes" are the units of cultural evolution; and both move through processes of vetting and selection towards existential continuity (Dawkins 195).

Dawkins' bimodal model of evolutionary data flow thus opened a way to account for both a human's genetic intelligence as well as their cultural, learned intelligence. With such a head start, however, Johannsen's genes for some time held a dominant, residual lordship over Dawkins' memes in terms of evolutionary influence — that is, until fairly recently. In fact, this cultural quantum of data, the "meme", has all but taken the throne from biological material with regards to knowledge acquisition and evolutionary influence. University of Maine researchers Timothy Waring et al. corroborate this stance in their 2021 study, where their published findings show that "'... the importance of culture... is surpassing the value of genes as the primary driver of human evolution... We evolve both genetically and culturally over time, but we are slowly becoming ever more cultural and ever less genetic'," (Waring et al.). &#x20;

In their publication, Waring et al. state their reasoning for this memetic eclipse of genetics in evolutionary impact, for why now "... \[culture] is a stronger mechanism of adaptation." This is due to culture's outperformance of genetics in _three_ key areas: 1)  _speed_; 2) a "_group-learn_" functionality (an area that genetics altogether lacks); and, 3), _flexibility_ (Waring et al.). Of the first, _speed_, they find that, "\[Culture is] faster: gene transfer occurs only once a generation, while cultural practices can be rapidly learned and frequently updated" (Waring et al.). Of the second, culture's "group-learn" component, Waring claims, "Factors like conformity, social identity and shared norms and institutions — factors that have no genetic equivalent... \[make] 'culturally organized groups appear to solve adaptive problems more readily than individuals, through the compounding value of social learning and cultural transmission in groups'" (Waring et al.). Biologist Marco Smolla of UPenn understands these two pockets of attributive cultural influence - e.g. "speed" and "group-learn" — as composite to what he calls the _continuous acquisition_ element of culture.  He states in a co-published 2020 study that "culture is acquired sequentially through a combination of episodes of social learning... and individual practice;" as this makes "the individual an active force in the transmission... Cultural evolution can proceed much faster than biological evolution, both in rate of change and in terms of trait complexity" (Smolla et al. 4, 5). From these claims we can begin to see that researchers are noting heretofore unacknowledged lines of efficiency in memetic learning that we do not see in genetic learning.&#x20;

Per memetic flexibility, Waring states, "Culture is also more flexible than genes: gene transfer is rigid and limited to... two parents, while cultural transmission is based on flexible human learning and effectively unlimited with the ability to make use of information from peers and experts far beyond parents. As a result, cultural evolution is a stronger type of adaptation than old genetics" (Waring et al.). Smolla says of memetic flexibility, "In biological evolution, information (genetic traits) is encoded in... the sequence of physical molecular structures... By contrast, in cultural evolution, cultural information... takes the form of mental representations... encoded as neuronal connections in the brain... \[so,] an individual cannot change its genome, but can make changes to the composition of its cultural traits" (Smolla et al. 3). Additionally, Smolla says, "while genes can be frequently and accurately accessed and copied, there are very limited possibilities of passing information to the genome that can be inherited by offspring. By contrast, mental representations cannot be directly observed or copied, but due to the high flexibility of the nervous system, mental representations can be continuously altered before they are exhibited and transmitted to others" (Smolla et al. 3).&#x20;

And so we find — in its continuous giving, its inexhaustible variability, its shared compounding — our El Dorado of knowledge, our virtually infinite learning reservoir, in memes.&#x20;

## Memes > Genes

It is hardly new to accept that culture, its memetic transmission, has an impact on what we know. It is a different thing altogether to see scholars finally in an agreeance that the elastic nature of cultural data holds in it _more_ substantive impacts and potentialities, most still untapped or unknown, than its genetic counterpart. Waring states, "Increasingly... human adaptations are steered by culture, and require genes to accommodate," because, "...the vast majority of intelligence, its seeking out, acquisition, and retention, now passes primarily through the memetic pathway" (Waring et al.).&#x20;

Thus it is, that in the context of our postmodern world, where genetics has become all but a code-based passenger in the car of human evolution, our intelligence, our progress as a species has become, according to professional opinion, more dependent on memes over genes; memes have taken the wheel. As such, they shall be, at least according to ACEL, the evolutionary data set we prioritize and leverage in optimizing humanity's future.&#x20;

This — our species' shift in prioritizing memetic intelligence over genetic intelligence — is a simple, if not inadvertent, matter of evolution itself. While our baseline genetic material was formed over ten millennia ago and does continue to evolve, it is overshadowed by the momentous, world-changing societal developments of the past few hundred years (Templeton). We have dominated our environment to where our biological needs are far outweighed by our cultural needs; and, when outlying cases do arise, our medical and technological innovations are by and large capable of saving lives (Zampieri). These innovations have also all but eliminated our biological need, our evolutionary necessity to consider genetic health when choosing a reproductive partner (Zampieri). All this together, if it were the case that we truly did have only one evolutionary pathway — that is, if it were only Johannsen's genetic pathway by which we transferred information — then we have all but already begun the slow collapse of our evolutionary road, and could be destined to remain the same or even a regressed species one millennia from now.&#x20;

As might Dawkins, Accelerationism refuses this fate, for the omnipresence of memes is too staggering an empirical data set -- even without a unit of measurement — to turn a blind eye, especially an eye attuned to latent potency and potentiality; these memes are flying, always, everywhere, always growing, always transforming themselves and teaching along every line traveled, all that they pass by or pass through. The frenzied life, the possible worlds in them, to the accelerator, leaves any chance of a crude, dull-witted submission to genetic determinism impossible to accept. Says the accelerator, there something buzzes in memes that needs peeling back — the desire to learn from that which we learn.&#x20;

While what we see underneath is not quantifiable — that no metric yet exists to plot points on a graph or to derive some formula, perhaps we may find that memes are nonetheless containable without numbers, so long as we have a deliberately composed and precise theoretical framework. We may borrow terminology and models from Dawkins for this, as well as other systems of thought (that are treated throughout this book), to create such a grounding so that we may begin to understand how memetic intelligence is prioritized, amalgamated, and passed from biological machine to biological machine. Only then, can we begin to truly and effectively _accelerate_ that process and catapult our evolutionary potential beyond what we thought was possible.&#x20;

Most importantly, we must start this effort now. For only now, a century later after Johannsen gave us that admittedly _accelerated-for-the-era_ discovery of plant genotypes and phenotypes, do humans seem to be washing off its residual, unintended ownership of, not the way we learn, but of the way we think we learn, and the false bounds by which the discovery of genetics has, until Dawkins, largely fettered us away from knowledge reservoirs unbound, our El Dorado. For memes are, through the form and function by which they move through any medium whatsoever, educative, and by that, harnessable, even sans units. And the first one to the door is the fastest. By this we mean that ACEL stands first in thresholds of this bursting potency of memetic acceleration: It is the first recognizer; the rapid adapter optimized. ACEL is the fastest meme. It has examined the learning myth from first principles; and, while not disavowing history and its kindnesses, seen in visions the memetic world embraced — or rather, contained: Instant accelerations everywhere. And when again they become the definition of a standard, then again they accelerate themselves.&#x20;
