---
description: >-
  "If I have seen further, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants." -
  Isaac Newton
---

# Religion: The Memetic Model Infallible

## The Meme Last Standing

Naturally, we want to achieve this goal we've set forth for ourselves: We wish to be successful in accelerating human intelligence, agency, and evolution. And often, when setting a goal, it is helpful to model one's behavior on those who have already seen success in a given arena. We observe them, studies their methods, and mimic them in hopes of materializing the same outcome. In short, we _mime_ their _meme_.&#x20;

And what memetic machine — what sticky mass has stuck itself the world over and still has room to cast a millennia's worth of ideas farther out beyond its current reach — has seen more success on our planet than all others? Here we speak of Religion: the champion of memes.&#x20;

While we, the biological machine, no doubt wield an inborn talent for memetic absorption, propagation, transference, evolution, it is so often unwitting, incidental, off-target, naive, messy — the way we meme the world. It is little exaggeration to say our reality is made up of mostly inadvertent memetic jumbles. Dennett agrees: In his reflection on an ant's compulsory behavior to gets itself eaten, he acknowledges this fluky nature of the meme generally, saying, "In fact, that's exactly what it is: a fluke! Its brain has been invaded by a fluke" (Dennett 4). Perhaps in a positive light we might be taken as but memetic _naturals_; originally unencumbered by plots and ploys and plans, like wind we pass ourselves on wherever we go. Would that this were always the case...

To be sure, it is not. And we should give thanks that it is not, for we would likely not have survived as a species were we never _intentional_ with our memetic repository. Our professional disciplines, our studies, our commerce, our societal organizations, architectures, technology — these moats of knowledge require intentional, exacting, precise funnels of memetic transfer to be able to cross onto their shores; the funneling systems we've created can be quite impressive, if not inefficient at times. Still, we have built and continue, selectively, to traverse these protective trenches, these exclusionary troughs by which our most prized memetic knowledge-houses are kept intact and sacred. We do this for the sake of our evolutionary security; for, these repositories help us as a species move forward through time, and so, we are ever-shoring up our preferred moats, and letting to sea those whose use to us has passed. Some of these will likely remain with us until we arrive to the very end of ourselves. No doubt, if there is but one meme still standing at the end of our world, it will be Religion, as it boasts the biggest moat of all.&#x20;

## What Religion Provides, and Why Only It Can

As the stickiest and most mollifying and convertible meme born by our species all those tens of thousands of years ago, Religion — with a capital R — has since its inception offered to hand an ever-ready "compass of the soul" to us — that we may navigate with peace through the challenges of daily living and find comfort in the questions that have no answers. Consider this: that religion has been able to fill this role for humankind in virtually every context that's ever manifest, how does it _not_ earn its place as the ultimate memetic model? It has metaphorically oriented the stars of countless cultures; brought order from chaoses spanning different geologic epochs; adapted, accommodated, changed course like water when presented new innovations and new knowledge — all this, without ever once feeling the sting of near-extinction. If anything, Religion, when presented with potential adversity, grows only stronger. Religion is like Medusa: cut one head off and three grow back.&#x20;

How is this memetic strength possible? How did it become so sticky, so mettled? What makes Religion's half-life so indefatigable against the rust of time, so indomitable against memetic erosion? And perhaps most curiously, why, with the infallible framework that it has proven itself to possess, can other memetic structures not simply copy and reproduce its formula to their own successes?&#x20;

While modern historical developments of domineering religious enterprise have been by no means happenstance, not thrown together like the memetic patchwork found in ordinary human life (lest they would have faded long ago), perhaps when looking at the origins of religious practice, we might see just how Religion came to offer us the most valuable gem of spiritual need: the order of meaning. American psychologist and philosopher William James, in his seminal 1902 work, _Varieties of Religious Experience,_ said of this, "Religion... consists of the belief that there is an unseen order, and that our supreme good lies in harmoniously adjusting ourselves thereto" (43).&#x20;

Indeed, it seems the singularity of Religion lies in the presiding stewardship that it offers over the most vulnerable pieces of property in our souls, particularly our metaphysical and existential gardens, ensuring they both have sufficient and balanced rains of answers and reasoning. Looking back, it does appear that, out of a need for _meaning-full_ frameworks around the concept of death, early humans of the Upper Paleolithic period (between 50,000 to 100,000 years ago), inadvertently and concomitantly ideated some immaterial "steward of the soul" in their development of burial rituals and beliefs in an afterlife — these would be the original instantiations of religious practice (Parker Pearson 28-29).&#x20;

Thus, since its very inception, we see a utilitarian functionality to Religion that no other memetic construction has ever been able to completely and utterly overtake in collective or individual human existence. Renowned sociologist Peter Berger states of this, "The sacred cosmos, which transcends and includes man in its ordering of reality, thus provides man’s ultimate shield against the terror of anomy" (Berger 36). So it is, while the strictest Enlightenment thinkers and scientists turned to alternative consolatory memetic structures — as philosopher Martin Heidegger proclaimed, "science is the new religion" (Strong 143), the metaphysical and existential shield and guardianship provided by Religion remains unmatched in its provided sense of spiritual safety. (Even Berger admits these secular attempts carry a religious component, "... in modern times there have been thoroughly secular attempts at cosmization, among which modern science is by far the most important. It is safe to say, however, that originally all cosmization had a sacred character" (Berger 37). &#x20;

## The Healthy and Wealthy Half-Life of Religion(s)

Religion today does not present as singular, of course. It has a long history of symptoms: There are currently dozens upon dozens of rhizomatic outgrowths, many stemming and borrowing from other manifestations whose half-lives have long ago ended, or not. For instance, while we know animism and shamanism to signify varieties of the first religious practices, they are still practiced by many aboriginal tribes native to non-developed countries; they also still sustain an influence in more commonly known religions. For instance, Latin American Christianity incorporates animism in their "Day of the Dead" celebration, as practitioners honor their deceased ancestors — quite akin to our above-mentioned creators of religion. Additionally, the deeply animistic Shintoism of Japan is practiced by nearly half of Japan's population today (Statista).&#x20;

Should one look closely enough at all extant religions, they are likely to find some semblance of these early religious practices. And while these are impressive memetic continuities, perhaps even more so are the primarily independent religions in their staggering collective strength. For instance, while its local traditions have also borrowed a few elements from animism and shamanism, Hinduism is itself over four-thousand years old and still has 1.2 billion followers today, making it the oldest extant major religion, as well as one of the most potent memes ever to have existed ([Pew Research Center](https://www.pewresearch.org/religion/2015/04/02/hindus/); [Encyclopedia Britannica](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Hinduism)). Likewise, the [Book of Genesis](https://www.vatican.va/archive/bible/genesis/documents/bible\_genesis\_en.html), the originating text of the Jewish and Christian religions that is said to date back at least the 6th century BCE, is currently the source of faith for 2.52 billion people, or 31.2% of the current global population (Arnold). The memetic half-lives of these lines of faith are so strong they seem to be at an utter standstill.&#x20;

It is certainly possible that all lines of religion, akin to evolutionary biology's established notion of _common descent_, have derived from a single memetic source that is deeply rooted in the distant past, that they trace their origins to some original framework. It is also just as interesting to consider the otherwise: that there were disparate groups of early humans that developed similar frameworks of meaning and value at similar times. In both cases, we are now the clear recipients of ten-of-thousands-of-year old memes that in some cases carry with them just as much memetic strength as they did in their early days, if not more.&#x20;

## Using the Model

Whatever the case may be, it is clear that religion is the singular extant memetic structure to withstand all adversity thrown its way. The longest lasting, the most pervasive, the deepest rooted memetic bestower-of-meaning that we biological machines require for a life lived with a peaceful heart.&#x20;

In returning to the original claim that humanity's typical, day-in-the-life slipshod memetic transference carry generally very low half-lives, knowing this, aren't we able to direct our agency toward transcending these mundane activations of our potential? Can't we bring intentionality, an intensity of agency to our memetic output? What if humanity were to try to create new memes with a healthy, wealthy, and sustainable half-life? As it is clearly the far and away out-performer of all other memetic structures, wouldn't Religion perhaps be _the_ model by which we, with deliberate intentionality, frame this new meme?&#x20;

