# Construction Methods

Advanced drilling techniques and technologies are needed to bore through the Earth's crust safely and securely in the construction process of the ACCEL Tunnel. Tunneling is purely an energy-transfer problem - how to impart maxium energy into the rock as fast as possible without having run-away thermal management problems on the machine. The obvious answer to this is a high-pressure water-jet spinning boring machine; since it can maximise energy transfer without runaway thermal issues (since water is the coolant).&#x20;

According to research findings, high-pressure water jets greatly increase TBM efficiency by minimizing disc cutter wear and improving cutting performance. As pointed out by a study published in Applied Sciences, "The high-pressure water jet can break rock efficiently, which is of great potential to overcome the problems of a tunnel boring machine (TBM) in full-face hard rock tunnel digging." Moreover, the excavated rocks can be ground down into an abrasive called garnet, which further increases the efficiency of the cutting fluid. This enables very accurate and fast excavation, reducing construction time. According to Zhang et al. (2020) in Advances in Mechanical Engineering, "Employing the coupled rock breaking method with high-pressure water jets decreased the specific energy and about 40% of the normal force of the disc cutter, which is supposed to contribute significantly to improving the efficiency of rock breaking"​.

Autonomous drilling machines are essential in constructing the ACCEL tunnels, these machines work with little human intervention and drill into mountain rocks while laying the outer wall of a tunnel. The outer wall can either be lined with prefabricated wall sections or cast in situ with local aggregates and a binding agent to give appropriate solidity to the structure. The waste rock, which is a result of drilling, falls back down the excavated tunnel and is excavated later, hence making the construction process less complex.

Autonomous drilling by advancing sensors and artificial intelligence will support navigation and adjust drilling parameters in real-time to achieve accuracy without human error. "The integration of artificial intelligence (AI) technologies, however, heralds a transformative era in this domain, promising to revolutionize traditional methodologies and augment construction endeavors with unprecedented efficiency and precision**.**"  ​(SAALG GEOMECHANICS)​. These technologies not only improve the speed of construction but also provide safety and reliability for a tunnel.

The ACCEL Tunnel will feature a design with a gentle curvature and an inclination between 30-60 degrees at the exit, exploiting part of the Earth's rotational spin for orbital launches. Its curvature minimizes deep excavation, hence being cost-effective and environmentally less disruptive. The inclination in the eastern direction is crucial to achieving suitable launch trajectories. The inclination is a balance between maximal lofting energy and maximal orbiting energy. The exact inclination will required modelling.&#x20;

The construction of the curved and inclined tunnel for a shuttle accelerator may be very challenging from an engineering point of view. A tunnel has to endure the process of maintaining its integrity within the action field of gravitational and centrifugal forces during the acceleration of a payload. Advanced geotechnical engineering techniques and real-time monitoring systems will keep the tunnel stable throughout operation. "Geotechnical engineering solutions and real-time monitoring are essential to ensuring the stability of tunnels subjected to dynamic forces during operation," - Journal of Central South University.

