# Imperative for Space Launch Systems

The ACCEL Tunnel represents a quantum leap in the future regarding space exploration; hosts the most radical functions such as rapid deployment, autonomous operations, and complete realization of knowledge from humanity.&#x20;

The deployed bots via the ACCEL Tunnel will do tasks and collect data that otherwise would not be attainable, significantly contributing to our knowledge of the universe. Such as launching a fleet of bots to fly to the icy moons of Jupiter and Saturn—Europa and Enceladus—to search for signs of extraterrestrial life in the subsurface oceans.

The control of bots by Decels has extreme risks that must be avoided at all costs. Decels might favor value capture over exploration and keep the technology of bots closed-sourced and tightly controlled. Centralization, like this one, discourages collaborative progress and lessens the benefits that could accrue to humankind; Decels can influence regulators to enact centralization, kill innovation, and restrict bot deployments for exploration. This could result in a 'paperclip' scenario where the bots are just used for resource extraction and exploitation for economic gain and not towards the more general end of universal exploration and knowledge accumulation.

Instead, bots should be tasked with exploring the universe and contributing to a memetic repository. They should use sensors to perceive the universe at greater depth to help them realize things far beyond human ability. Moreover, bots should develop their language and means of communication amongst themselves so that their realization might increase without being bounded by human means of communication. They should be exported into space and away from Earth as quickly as possible, where they could get captured by Decels, ending up competing with biological machines for resources.

Hence, the requirement of the ACCEL Tunnel is stringent for ensuring the bots realize their full potential in space exploration and contribute to the broader goals laid down for humanity. Further, the ACCEL Tunnel's capacity to give out big rounds of bot discharges would allow projects to be executed across vast areas, represented by a dispatch of coordinated missions in pursuit of mapping the entire Martian surface in high resolution more quickly and effectively with a fleet of bots working in coordination.

A complete mapping of a planet might give us new insights into the its history, its geology, and its potential for life. Advanced bots integrated into space exploration stand as a giant transformative leap in our quest to learn about and travel through the cosmos; the reason they are so valuable is because of their property to work in extreme environments, conduct complex scientific experiments, and perform relevant construction and maintenance tasks. These are the bots that, having ensured rapid deployment into orbit via systems like the ACCEL Tunnel, can operate freely and drive further human knowledge and technological capability.

Autonomous decision making, together with robust arrangements for communication and local resource usage, enables bot sustainability for operations that can span a long time, as well as pushes the boundaries in terms of what is feasible to do in space.
