# Chapter 22: Conclusion

Accelerationism is more than a philosophical mindset; it is an imperative call to action, motivated by progress and advancement. In this book, we have covered the key points of what it means to accelerate--from accelerating the development of humanity itself, to the development of intelligence pathways, both genetic and memetic. We delved into machines, biological and silicon-based, and discussed the adversaries that the universe imposes on them, testing their existence. Humanity lies at the intersection of intelligence and vulnerability, with a charge to propel matters forward. It is in our journey that we realize the necessity for collective effort in embracing accelerationism to give life to making continuity and progress part of our intellectual legacy.

Accelerationism is not an option. Strategies fronting technological advancement and infrastructure development--with a cultural constitution for progress over stagnation--have to be followed if humanity is to move along the tracks of time. Improved technological capacities alone are not enough, but must be made available to result in actual betterment for all. The accelerated strategy called for within the document makes this an open-source innovation battle, a collaborative effort, and a quest for knowledge at all costs. We are required to tap both genetic and memetic pathways and to keep on upgrading our collective intelligence.

The journey toward acceleration is not without its challenges; there are decelerationist ideologies along the way hampering the march toward development. This ideology is present everywhere, as a cowardly vision looking to place a damper on human potential. A robust defense of free thought, innovation, and knowledge sharing is needed against these adversaries. Society has to consciously protect itself from forces of central control. Moreover, the adversarial nature of the universe itself--in terms of existential threats from asteroids, solar events, and other cosmic phenomena--necessitates readiness in safeguarding our genetic and memetic repositories.&#x20;

Education makes up the base of accelerationism, Future generations need to be armed with knowledge and tools so that such a mission can be furthered ahead. This also means cultivating an atmosphere of critical thinking, innovating, and gaining deep insight into our universe. Leaving behind the legacy of knowledge and frameworks for improvement, we ensure that based on our breakthroughs, humanity will go further forward. The task of enlightening young minds is organically linked with perpetuating the light of consciousness.&#x20;

The future of accelerationism depends on the synergy between bio- and silicon-based machines. Technologies of the future need to align with the principles of accelerationism as to not set human progress behind. The processing capabilities of silicon machines and their potential to learn from experience will grant them a crucial role in space exploration and the evolution of our understanding of the universe.&#x20;

Ultimately, accelerationism will lead to a "post-scarcity" utopia, wherein machines and humans work together to increase collective intelligence unhindered. This vision is no fantasy, neither something yet in an incalculable future, but a reachable place if efforts to accelerate it are converged.

The call to action is clear. Accelerate--increase and survive, or stagnate and die. This is the imperative that should wake up the reader to the accelerationist mindset: laboring together toward a better future. Open-source principles, fostering innovation, and creating collaboration at all levels of society are essential milestones to realize on this journey.  One can barely overstate the need for accelerationism; it is the way toward survival and human flourishing.&#x20;

Last but not least, I would like to express my gratitude to all those who have read this book and joined the movement. And while we are projecting ourselves into the future, be optimistic and have faith in humanity's immense potential towards achieving positive developments by keeping the light of consciousness brighter than it has ever been--We can do it. Thank you for being a part of this journey. Let us step on the gas--it is time to accelerate. #ACCEL.
