# Exporting Intelligence

Humanity has accumulated knowledge in the form of memes, shaping them into delicate tapestries woven through centuries of progress and culture. These repositories are at risk, vulnerable to both terrestrial and extra terrestrial threats. A single coronal mass ejection from the sun contains more mass than the entire human population combined. It is composed of powerful solar radiation that disrupts electrical grids and communication networks. In short, it could plunge us back to the Industrial Age, wiping out at least a century of technological and social progress.

As we stand, an asteroid impact of even medium size could lay waste to the biosphere, as it has during extinction events that reset life to crocodiles and mosquitoes, millions of years ago. ([Marshall Brain](https://science.howstuffworks.com/nature/natural-disasters/asteroid-hits-earth.htm)) A colossal asteroid, with a similar magnitude to what -presumably- created the moon ([Giant-impact model](https://www.nhm.ac.uk/discover/how-did-the-moon-form.html)) , could wipe out complex life completely and reduce Earth to a primordial world, dominated by bacteria -- a billion years of evolutionary progress gone, in the blink of an eye.

The prevalence and success of humanity has made us more capable and, at the same time, more vulnerable; we have become more sophisticated and helpless through every human generation--dependent on intricate systems of infrastructure. This very dependance is what makes us exceedingly susceptible to the whims of the universe.  Our genetic and memetic heritage could be safeguarded on a different planet; as it stands in this day and age, a trip to Mars and back is achievable in less than three years ([F. Topputo](https://home.aero.polimi.it/topputo/data/uploads/papers/articles/article-2015-3.pdf)). Maintaining a foothold on mars could mean having an insurance policy in the case of terrestrial catastrophes.&#x20;

Yet, even Mars is but a temporary refuge. The inevitable death of our sun will make the entire solar system uninhabitable. If humanity wants to survive long-term, we must aim for interstellar travel. Proxima Centauri, the closest star, is estimated to be 4.24 light years away ([Britannica](https://www.britannica.com/story/how-do-we-know-how-far-away-the-stars-are)), and at 1% of the speed of light, it would take 424 years to get there—17 times faster than our current capabilities​ ([Parker Solar Probe](https://www.livescience.com/space/nasas-parker-solar-probe-smashes-record-for-fastest-man-made-object)). Even beyond all of this, the ultimate destiny that our galaxy will impose on us will be forcing us to contemplate intergalactic travel. The nearest galaxy is far beyond the limits of any physical machine we can currently imagine, Andromeda, located millions of light years away. ([Earthsky](https://earthsky.org/clusters-nebulae-galaxies/andromeda-galaxy-closest-spiral-to-milky-way/)) This means that the vessels that will be used to carry our legacy across galaxies will transcend traditional physical machines. As humanity increasingly becomes a cohesive whole, dependent on the complications that we build, our vulnerability to the cosmic grows. This journey is more than academics, it is an imperative progression, necessary for the survival of our existence. Humanity needs to accelerate technological growth, developing the advancements that will be capable of enduring those challenges.&#x20;

In simple terms, to ensure the survival of our existence, we must create backups of our genetic and memetic repositories on other planets. The most feasible of these is Mars--this will be the first step in a much larger endeavor. Interstellar and intergalactic travel demands machines that will tolerate the most extreme of circumstances. As we exist, biological machines are ill-suited for such journeys ([NASA](https://www.nasa.gov/hrp/hazards/)). We must look to non-biological machines, possibly artificial intelligence, to accomplish this task and carry the torch of human civilization across the cosmos.&#x20;

We have to be able to gaze at the stars, and imagine machines-- one day -- carrying us across those vast distances between galaxies. These machines will be our only insurance, perhaps allowing at the very least some essence of humanity--knowledge, culture, and maybe even consciousness itself--surviving in the face of the ultimate fate of the universe. It is a vision that challenges and inspires us to go beyond what we believe to be possible.



