# Design and Function of SpaceBrains

The process of creating a SpaceBrain starts with the surgical, rather delicate, removal of the brain from its skeletal housing. Although this operation is quite complex, it already lies within the realm of capabilities of current neurosurgery.&#x20;

Functional MRI and CT-like advanced imaging technologies that help surgeons with detailed maps of the brain are crucial for making precise incisions. Once extracted, the extracted brain is then given a place in a uniquely designed pod that offers a most extreme controlled environment. This Pod is designed to continuously deliver synthesized nutrients and oxygen .

This pod is designed with advanced materials and technologies which will help prevent the brain from receiving physical damage and environmental hazards. Real-time monitoring systems of nutrient levels and other relevant parameters, along with self-correction mechanisms for these factors, ensure that the brain works at full capacity. Inbuilt integration of renewable sources into the life support system makes it sustainable and autonomous. For example, such pods could be powered by a mix of solar energy and advanced energy storage systems to provide a continuous energy supply in remotest or isolated locations.

One of the most outstanding features in the functionality of the SpaceBrain is remapping the brain's sense and motor functions. These functions, normally routed through the spinal cord containing an estimated 69 million neurons, make provisions for interface with the finely resolved sensor field for fine-grained communication with a plethora of external devices and sensors. It lets the brain retain its original senses, such as seeing and hearing, but gives room for new sensory modalities to be embedded within it-- a sensor field that extends the spectrum of perceptions by the brain from enhanced perception with the eyes to see within other parts of the electromagnetic spectrum, right down to sensing environmental variables at both micro and macro scales. For example, a SpaceBrain would be able to perceive ultraviolet light or infrared radiation to add more detail to reality.

The advanced connectivity of the SpaceBrain project will enhance the read-write interactions with digital networks, essentially connecting the SpaceBrain as one of the all-time most versatile nodes in the global information infrastructure. Adding to that, safety circuits and synthetic brain barriers secure the brain's work from possible cyber threats. Protective circuits are created so that all data in the brain and the way it works cannot be accessed or changed by any unauthorized entity. Synthetic brain barriers, acting like firewalls, filter both the incoming and outgoing information so that malware cannot attack.&#x20;

In other words, state-of-the-art medical, scripting, engineering, and technological realizations are embedded in the design and functionality of SpaceBrains. Due to the controlled environment--the artificial conditions simulating those within the body--the brain will be optimally healthy and functional. The addition of renewable sources of energy, enhanced senses, secure interfaces with digital devices, to the SpaceBrain allows it to present as a powerful, well-rounded entity capable of perception, communication, and interaction to an unprecedented level.



