---
description: >-
  "The universe we observe has precisely the properties we should expect if
  there is, at bottom, no design, no purpose, no evil and no good, nothing but
  blind pitiless indifference." - Richard Dawkins
---

# The Adversarial Universe

## To Survive, We Must All Digest Our Aloneness

While ACEL has accelerated past the antiquated worldview that humanity possesses some sort of latent, privileged protection from the universe's entropic forces, a critical mass of humans are still dangerously walking through life utterly naked, oblivious in their exposure to the absolute ambivalence within the unfolding cosmos. In doing so, they put at risk more than just themselves; they threaten their species' continued existence as well. For, with a catastrophic potentiality peeking over the horizon (to be treated in later chapters), we cannot afford to have any of our potential adaptive possibilities unavailable to us. Should we wish to survive any approach by the dark cloud of indifference, humanity must gather and have at its disposal quite literally _all_ of its resources.&#x20;

This is an imperative: If we want to live, we must quickly and collectively agree as a species that, beyond any reasonable doubt, the molecular structure of the cosmos does not care if we live or die; it does not differentiate between a human being and a tardigrade, or a leaf, or one of Saturn's rings. Even famed astronomer Carl Sagan took note of this in _Cosmos_, saying, "The universe seems neither benign nor hostile, merely indifferent to the concerns of such puny creatures as we" (250).&#x20;

While some of our species do despairingly confront this fact, their woe is not so dangerous as those who stubbornly refuse to accept that no succor has been, is, or will ever be provided from anywhere _out-there._ In fact, as the entirety of our repository tells us, the _only_ thing that advocates for us is _our own selves._&#x20;

## Past Victories & Our Inherited Survival Intelligence

While we cannot know if early humans acknowledged the universe's silent and ever-threatening ambivalence to _life_, they do appear to have abided in some sense the callous nature of material existence. We hazard this assumption because we are, in fact, _here_, meaning humanity has won its battles thus far.&#x20;

Truly, all current living things carry in their line victorious predecessors, those past champions who've confronted, and successfully dealt with, the silence of cosmic disregard. From each of their confrontations was captured and stored in respective repositories almost sacred forms of survival knowledge, which have helped the perpetuation of life all the way to the arrival of us and all that is here now. It is this memetic flow triumphant, this unstopped regifting to ourselves intelligences that bring these words to you now.&#x20;

But these forms in our memetic arsenal of survival may not be enough for what we are to face next.&#x20;

## Preparing for Our Next Battle: Adapting with Agency&#x20;

In _Self-Reliance_, Ralph Waldo Emerson suggests, "Do your work, and you shall reinforce yourself... Insist on yourself... Your own gift you can present every moment with the cumulative force of a whole life's cultivation" (27, 35). And, indeed, that a dark cloud of cosmic ambivalence seems to draw near within our lifetime, ACEL takes Emerson's words beyond mere suggestion and insists they are an existential necessity: Should humanity wish to continue carrying the torch of victory, we must _right_ _now_ take hold of and develop each of our agencies; we must take stock of these inherited knowledge reservoirs, adapt them where necessary and then accelerate them to their apex if we are to have any confidence in our upcoming trial.&#x20;

It is in light of the troubles in our _yet-to-happen_ drive ACEL's advocacy for this maximization of human potential: We can improve our chances of weathering impending storms _only_ _if_ we increase our individual agencies. For ACEL, it is only the fully maximized agent who stands the highest, and perhaps _sole_ chance to survive what lies ahead of humanity, for it is _this_ person who, in assessing their individual and collective assets and liabilities, releases vestigial knowledge to adaptive processes and reshapes our memetic weapons, mends and reinforces our shields of knowledge against danger.&#x20;

Fortunately, as psychologist Leda Cosmides and anthropologist John Tooby note, we are each more than capable of the task at hand, as humanity's adaptability has been an essential piece to our continued existence. They say, "Because we know that the human mind is the product of the evolutionary process... the mind consists of a set of adaptations, designed to solve the long-standing adaptive problems humans encountered..." (163). ACEL's credo, "_because we can, we must_", comes to the forefront here: That we are capable of developing this agency, for the sake of our survival we must maximize each of our potentials.&#x20;

And that is only the beginning of our adaptations, for, while each individual manifestation of agency holds promise, they by themselves are still not enough to ensure our continued existence through time. Thus it is, that we must join them together in cooperative solidarity.

## Adaptation #1: Become a Coordinated Totality

Humanity must succeed, and rapidly so, in adapting from existing as pockets of solidarity to an aligned totality, as defined by its quality of coordination. As stated, for what may come, we will need much more than individual  agency-maximized hero. While individual acceleration is a necessary prerequisite, it is our _aggregated_ activation of potential that we must strive for as the goal: the maximization of _collective_ human agency. While we are one shield for one, together we effect for ourselves a fortress greater than the sum of our parts — one that is, out of necessity, adaptive and cooperative.&#x20;

While viewers of fear-based media might disagree, this adaptation is not as far-fetched as they might think. In fact, in his seminal 1976 work, _The Selfish Gene_, evolutionary theorist Richard Dawkins stated that the behaviors of cooperation and coordination are ingrained in us as far down as the molecular level. He states, "Selection has favoured genes that cooperate with others. In the fierce competition for scarce resources, in the relentless struggle to eat other survival machines, and to avoid being eaten, there must have been a premium on central coordination rather than anarchy within the communal body" (47). If the genetic structures that compose our human bodies are in coordination, how could it be so utterly impossible that the bodies themselves might agree to an existence founded in coordination?&#x20;

By and large, we might already be understood as a coordinated _body of bodies_: That the majority of us today do not wake up first thing and begin to violently tear at others for resources, and, at the very least, live in a state of tolerance of others, from this perspective, humanity might be said to have grown into quite the coordinated and cooperative species. Of our becoming an asymptotic totality when faced with a true existential threat, we might find in the words of Cosmides and Tooby an implication that we might be closer than we think. They say (using "altruism" for cooperation/coordination), "Over many generations that design trait \[e.g. altruism] will spread through the population until all members of the species have it...\[even now] People... carry out innumerable acts on a daily basis whose purpose is to help others" (167). To say it another way, it appears that cooperation, or coordination, is moving linearly toward becoming embedded within our comprehensive memetic framework; and, with each next obstacle that the cosmos inadvertently presents to our species, our total coordination strengthens. It is imperative that our species prioritize the continuation of this process, that our _individual_ wills accelerate towards a cooperative, _collective_ will to survive our species.&#x20;

## Adaptation #2: Accelerate Memesis Everywhere

While the intensities latent within universal indifference pose an ever credible threat, that we even have the opportunity to put effort towards surviving is wholly indebted to the stalwart forms of humanity past, their sheer determination and spread of their "biological quick-thinking", both needed now more than ever. With each major step taken, our late champions — from their learning to walk, to the creation of the wheel, then vehicles, then flying, and with this, further spreading and strengthening our genetic and memetic repositories — they propelled and propagated humanity forward through clock-time, and with each new adaptation a stronger resilience. It is this last one – the _accelerant rate of memetic propagation_ – that reveals to us where our memetic tensile strength lies strongest, and where we need to focus should we make the reasonable choice to prepare for the future: The more _collectively embedded_ the meme, the longer its half-life; the longer its half-life, the longer our half-life.&#x20;

Consider the analogy: In a scenario where a pathogen exists in several discrete locations, it takes longer for the biologists to find, contain, and kill this virus completely. Were we to become the totality mentioned above, we would be an exponentially more formidable foe against threats of extinction, if not simply based on our geographical distribution. It is only to our benefit, then, that, to _last_, to persist victorious against the void as a whole species, we must accelerate our efforts towards coordination and cooperation over the widest geographical distribution possible. Should we propagate this adaptation successfully, ACEL would be much more difficult to annihilate, thanks to its strengthened collective resilience. This is an imperative with which famed Holocaust writer Elie Wiesel's agrees, "In spite of despair, hope must exist. In spite of suffering, humanity must prevail" ([Elie Wiesel](https://www.azquotes.com/quote/859323)).

## Adaptation #3: Embrace the Indifference

There is one more adaptive attack vector we should consider against this indifferent, if not hostile, cosmos. Given the fact that material existence courses in unpredictable, rhizomatic randomness, ruled only by the unbiased laws of physics, we — as totality — might effort to to propagate that a comfort be taken in this meaninglessness. Here we consider Albert Camus' Mersault, who, at the end of _The Stranger_ (originally, _L'Étranger_), reflects on his changed worldview, "As if that blind rage had washed me clean, rid me of hope; for the first time, in that night alive with signs and stars, I opened myself to the gentle indifference of the world. Finding it so much like myself — so like a brother, really — I felt that I had been happy and that I was happy again" (122-123). Albert Camus, the predecessor of absurdist philosophy, thus advocates for an embracing, rather than a shunning, of the ambivalence of the cosmos. Why? Because only in clear-sighted silent meaninglessness can one find peace; and for ACEL's sake, this type of peace, in its conquering of fear, might well suggest an adaptive advantage, where the agency-maximized human may draw nearer to and attack its ultimate adversary with precision.

## How We Accelerate Adaptations / Knowledge

The three agency-driven adaptations proposed above are by no means exhaustive of our potential routes to improve our survival rate. With that said, they are purposefully chosen for the possibility of a particularly rough road ahead for humanity.&#x20;

Time is certainly of the essence, here. ACEL might encourage that those who _can_ maximize their agency and direct it towards our species' survival _should do so_. This is because, as will be explained later in this text, we are coming upon a time where our existence depends on our having _all hands on deck_, as the saying goes. As our technological innovations will inevitably lead us into new territories and force us to adapt to new designs of existence, it is imperative that we prepare prior to such a significant engagement by planning and executing certain memetic adaptions.

There are two avenues by which these take place, two methods of how information passes from human to human: the _genetic pathway_ and the _memetic pathway_. While they are both lines of transmission, the genetic and memetic pathways vary greatly in their domains and their ranges, in their storage and sorting methods, and in how they manage adaptations (Smolla et al. 3). We dedicate a full chapter to each of these pathways to round out Part 1 of this book, the end of which should leave readers grounded in how human beings typologically _manage_ intelligence, and how humanity can manually accelerate pieces of that process according to its needs and preferences. Once it is shown the amount of agency our species has at its fingertips, it will be better equipped to ensure its survival and extend its evolutionary destiny.&#x20;
