# Accelerating Toward Philosophical Maturity

So loom the Two Conundrums over the promise of Accelerationism. Together, they stand as the most worthy adversary, the pinnacle threat to the entire movement itself. Perhaps it is that, unlike e/acc's need for Effective Altruism, these established theoretical postulations do not attack directly the movement's belief system -- they do not _need_ Accelerationism to justify their existence, and so are therefore not the piece of the opposition that needs to justify its existence. So, what is to be done in the face of this potential theoretical annihilation of Accelerationist thought, as posed by these two theories?&#x20;

The answer lies in humility, and thereby, growth. It is no small feat for a new thought system to establish itself as an equal in such a worthy and already overcrowded room of millennia old theories and philosophies. And Accelerationism -- as an action driver of collective purpose, as a bold and brazen system of ethics -- might run straight through one door and out the window if it does not know _how to steer_ as it accelerates. We see this behavior so often in prodigies: infinitesimally rare, generational talent whose promise ends too soon due to youthful and immature behavior keeping their growth at bay.&#x20;

For this reason it is suggested, that rather than push its way into the room through brute force and childishly claiming it knows better than all that came before, Accelerationism stands to carry a much longer memetic half-life should it arrive to the door as the well-developed, mature, vetted, and self-assured system of ethics that undoubtedly lies latent within it. This road to maturity for Accelerationism may begin, not in spite of, but rather _thanks to_ the Two Conundrums, for they two together have given sound food for thought. The road to maturity for Accelerationism therefore begins with an acceptance that it, from a basic metaphysical standpoint, can not know everything, and that the memetic understanding of the universe remains elusive.

This philosophical self-reflection proffered as a suggestion to the young and full-of-promise system that is Accelerationism should _not_ be mistaken as any ulterior decelerant tactic. It is anything but and just the opposite; for, if activated, the self-investment put towards its maturing will only sustain a longer half-life to materialize its noble purpose. To note, maturity here we take not mean finding mature philosophical supports to prop up its stances; it already has a strong organic foundation of inspirations: a purpose well-established in the praxeology of Ludwig von Mises; an aim directionally aligned within Hegel's dialectical framework. That its set of normative ethics will continue to accelerate without hesitation toward its goals is not being put into question. However, it is lacking one building block that all half-life-rich philosophies carry with them: humility and humility's respectful acknowledgment of the validity of other discrete theoretical systems that approach the same problem differently.&#x20;

Indeed, Accelerationism could even take stock of its own propoundings: Does it not explicitly state that systems will likely be usurped by more robust and better suited frameworks in the future, including its own? -- that it, too, will be upgraded, just as it upgrades others now? Indeed, Accelerationism is wiser than its years; and can be nobler than its past.&#x20;

It is poised here to frame its purpose clearly and deliberately place it before all else,  to accelerate and extend its memetic half-life as best it can to help all of humanity evolve. This is what it takes to enjoy a long half-life in the endless cycle of evolution, to join the ranks within the capitalism of ideas, where good ideas well-executed flourish, and bad ideas die.&#x20;

Creation. Destruction. Evolution Forever.&#x20;

The universe is the ultimate test of becoming

We must accelerate humanity with humility.
